^ their hope in the mercy of our lord, and reprehending (as it were somewhat
in my way) ye great foolish ambition of rich men uttering their superfluyte and
arroga^cy after death, which at the uttermost, death should have fynys^hed.
Also I somewhat sharply rebuke their vice, which for their own auauntage, doth
abuse y^ folyshnesse of rich men, which they ought specially to ^ebuke. For who
dare be so bold to monyss^e liberally men of great power and riches, if such as
{pro}fesse the^ deed from the world do flatter their vices / be it there be no
such as I have described, yet notwtstandynge I have here showed an example
which they ^ught to eschew. But and if there be many things spoken comynly
among the people much more detestable than these which I have written / t^an
men indiffere^t may se therein my cyu^lyte, and correct their own vice. and
such as be not culpable may amend and cause to refrain the^ which doth other
wise. Truly I have spoken nothing to the reproach of any state, onel^sse ye
will say, that he sclaundrech all ye chrystianite, which speaks any thing (and
that by way of monytion) against the corrupt manners of christen men. But it
were their part in especial: whom the honour of their ordre so much m^ue^h, to
restrain them which with their noughty deeds doth so much dishonest their
ordre. But in so much now as they acknowledge such their faithful fellows, and
moreover greatly esteemed, and defe^deth them. How can they than for shame
complain or say that the estimation of their ordre is any thing empeched of him
y^ doth monysshe them for their profit? Here in I suppose good redder the
intent of our ^utour, in this said dyaloge was to show rather a love toward
relygyo^ and all good religious men, whithe thing caused me the rather to
traduced this matter in to our english tongue / than as some (whose iugementes
I do not greatly regard) saith yt he writes against them / far differing from
the opinion and mind of ye good religious father saint Hierome, in whose mouth
this saying was often. Where vice is but generally rebuked there no {per} soon
hath injury or wrong. Which lesson after my mind, were much more mete fo^ every
christen man, than unthankfully to rapine at such as be studyous to do them
good. Following rather the example of ye unkind Greeks against their good and
valiant captain Agamemnon, than (as we should all) the christen charity. But I
will no longer hyndre you from our dyaloge.

Mercolphus. Phedrus. Pulcher.
Fro whens came hither Phedrus, suppose ye not from Trophon^us dene.


Wherefore dost thou ask that question?


For because you art much sadder than thou art wont, more deformed, more
filthy, more ferse, to make few word^s, nothy^g at all after thy name.


If (as we se by experye^ce) they which co^tynew any space in Fou^ders shops,
draws to them some blaknesse. What great cause hast you to marvel, if I being
continually so many days with two seek men, dyeng and buried be more pensive
than I am wont. and also much the more when they were both my special fre^des?


Who dost you tell me was buried.


Did you know one George balearyke?


Only I have herd of him for to my knowledge I never saw his face.


The other I am sure thou know nothing at all / He was called Cornelius
montius, with whom I had great famylyaryte many years.


It was never my chance to be any man death.


I have ben more of ten tha^ I wold.


I pray the tell me^ is death so horrible a thing as it is comy^ly said?


The passage toward death is more harde and painful tha^ death it self. but he
which casts out of his mind ye fearfulness and imagination of death: to him is
released a gr^te part of ye payne. To speak brefely, all that is painful,
either in sekenesse, or in death, is made more tolerable if a man co^myt
himself holly to the will of god^ For as concerning ye feeling of death, ( when
the very time the soul is departing from the body) after my iugement is nothing
at all / or (if there be any) that it is very dull / for because nature (before
that come to pass) bry^geth in a slombre, and makes amassed all the sensible
parties.


We are all borne without feeling of our selves.


But not without feeling of our mother.


Why dye we not in likewise? Wherefore hath god appointed death to be so
cruciable and painful a thing?


He so ordained yt our nativities should be painful and full of perils to the
mother, that she might so much more love yt, which she had brought forth.
Contrary wise it was his pleasure that death should be fearful / lest every
where men should infer their own death. For in so much yt when we may se daily
many which do slay the^selues, what thy^kest thou to come, if death had nothing
horrible? as often as a man rebukes his servant either his child / yea, as
often as the wife should take displeasure with her husband, as often as any
manner of thi^g died miscarry, or any thi^g chau^ced being sorrowful to ye
mind, by and by men would ren^e to hang themselves, to kill them with sword, to
draw them to some convenient place where they might cast the^selfes down
heedlynges, either to poison / now the bitterness of death makes vs yt we love
better our life / in especial when physycie^s can not heal a man ones deed.
Albeit like as we all have not like chance in our natyuyte / even so there be
divers manners and ways of death. Some short and swift death delivers hens,
some other wastes away with slow death. Lethargic^ yt is to say such as hath
th^sekenes of forgetfulness. In likewise they which be story of the venomous
Aspys altogyder in a slo^bryng, dies without any feeling of the^selfe. I have
observed this thing in especial, that there is no kind of death so painful but
it is tolerable after yt a man hath with a fully fixed mind decreed for to go
hens.


Whither of these dethes think you to be most like the death of a christian?


Me seems the death of George more honourable.


But I pray you hath death also his covetousness of honour?


I died never se two persons dyeng so unlike a dethe^ if ye have so much
leisure to here, I will show you plainly y^ departing of both twain. but it
shall be thy part to jug which of the dethes is most to be wished to a christen
man.


yea, mary I pray the that you will not think it grievous to tell / for I wold^
here nothing more gladly^


Therefore here first of G^orge. After that death had showed certain and sure
tokens of himself the flock of phisicions which of lunge time had take cure of
this patient, nothing being a known of th^ despair of life began to ask their
stipends.


How many were they?


So^tymes ten, and sometime twelve, and six when they were fewest.


There was ynow to kill a man in good helthe.


After the time they had their money / t^ ^rned they privily such as were about
the seek man, that death was at hand. And y^ they should prepayre, and make
ready all such things as should pertain unto y^ helthe of the soul / saying
that there was no hope at all of any bodily welthe. And thereupon the seek man
was lovingly, by such as were his spaecial friends, monysshed that he should
co^myt ye cure of his body to god^ and that he should only mind those things
which {per}teyned to depart well hens. As soon as George herd these things: he
looked, and that very fers^y, vpo^ the physicians / and as it were one sore
displeased that they should all give him up, they said to him again, that they
were physicians and no gods / and that they had done so much as they could by
their science. albeit that there was no medicine which could remedy against the
ordinance of god. This done, they go in to y^ next chambre.


What? died they tarry still after that they had received their wages?


They were not yet agreed what kind of sekenesse it was. One affirmed y^ it was
a dropsy / another said it was a timpani. some said it was apostome in ye inner
parts. some said it was one disease / some another. and all the time they toke
in governance the patient they disputed stiffly what manner of sekenes it
should be.


O, how happy was the patient in y^ mean time?


But because at length to end their co^tencyon they desired his wife to ask of
such as were his friends to suffer an Anothomye or section to be mad^ of the
deed body. and that it should cause much honour to be spoken / and also y^ it
was so accustomed to be done for honours sake in great noble men. And moreover
that the thing it self should be healthful to many / and also meritorious to
the seek man. And the rather to optayn their purpose they {pro} missed to bye
of their own charges a trentall of masses, for the profit of the deed. This
request hardly, but at the length with entreating of the wife and certain of
his kynsmen was opteyned. These maters done the guard of physicians died wind
the^selues away / for they say comynly, yt it is not convenient that they which
be wont to help life: should be y^ beholders of death, or be pres^t at
buryalles. Anon was called for one Bernardin{us} a reverend father as ye know
well enough, keeper of one of saint fra^ceys flocks, to here his co^fessyon.
Before the confession was all together finished a multitude of the.iiij.
ordres, whom y^ people call the begging ordres was come in to the house.


So many deuouri^g Uultures to one poor pyece of carrion?


Than afterword the parish pressed was called for to anoyle the man, and to
give him the sacrament of our lords body.


Devoutly.


But there was almoost a blody fray betwixt ye parish pressed and the other
solitary fathers.


At the seek ma^nes bed?


And also Christ himself looking upon them.


What caused all the besynesse so suddenly?


The parish pressed (after that he knew the seek man was co^fessed to ye
Francyscane) said that he would neither mynystre the sacrament of anoylyng nor
of the alter / or any burying / onelesse that he herd with his ears the seek
ma^nes co^fession. He said moreover, that he was the parish pressed / and that
he must give account to god for his little sheep. but yt he said he could not
do if only he were ignorant of the secretes of his conscience.


Seemed he not to speak reasonably?


Not unto them verily. For they all cried against him, and in especy all
Bernardinus, and Uincentius the dominican.


What reaso^s brought they?


They set upon the poor pressed with great rebukes and raylynges^ calling hy^
often ass, and a mete keeper for hogs. I said Uincentius, am a bachelor of
dyuynyte format / and shortly shall belycencyate / and also shall be promoted
with the title of a doctor. Thou art scarcely come to the redyng of the gospel.
How is it than possible that thou can excuse, and jug the secretes of any man
conscience? But and if thou list for to be besyed, goo see what thy harlots,
and bastard brattes doo at home. and many other obprobryous things which I am
greatly ashamed to show.


What said he / was he domme at those words?


Domme? yea, thou would have said he had ben as the proverb saith. A greshop
taken by the wings. I said he, shall make of bean stalks much better bachelors
than thou art. The ^utours and capytaynes of your ordres Domynyke and
Frau^ceys, where learned they I pray you Aristoteles phylophy / or the
arguments of Thomas / either Scotus speculacio^s? or where I pray you were they
made bachelors? ye creped in to ye world, than easy to believe your
superstycions / but than ye were but a few and lowly^ and some also meke and
well learned men. Than your nests were in the feldes and poor cottages / but
shortly after ye flitted thens, both in to ye richest cites and in to the
fairest parts of the^. Saying there be so many poor villages in y^ country
abroad which can not find a shepherd / there should ye bestow your labours^
there were convenient places for you to labour in / but now ye will be nowhere
but in ye houses of rich men. ye face and croak under the name of popes / but
your privileges be not worth a straw: but where as the bishop, parsone, or
vicar doth not his duty. In my church shall none of you preach so lunge as I am
the curate and have my helthe. I am no bachelor, neither saint Martin was any
bachelor, and yet he played ye very bishop. if I lack learning I will not ask
it of you. Suppose ye yt the world is yet so blind and foolish, that (
wheresoever they se saint Domynyke or Fraunceys co^e) they will think their
sanctimony and holiness there to be? or is it to you any matter at all what I
do at home at my house? What pageants ye play in your den^es, and what knavery
ye use with holy nonnes all the world knows. Also how little y^ better or
cleaner be the rich men houses which ye haunt is ope^ly known. yea as the
proverb saith, both to blere eyed {per} sons and barbours. To tell the what was
more spoken I dare not. truly he handled those reverend fathers with small
reuere^ce. And none end should have ben, oneles Georgius had signified with
wagging of his hand, yt he would say some thing. Much ado it was to apteyne
that their chiding might cease so lunge. than said the seek man. Keep peas
between you, I will confess me again to the my curate / than after thou shalt
be payed thy money or thou go out of this house / both for bell ringing,
dyriges, the hearse, for burial neither by any means I will give the occasion
to co^playn on me.


Died the pressed refuse so equal a co^dycio^?


Nothing at all only he murmured much of the confession, which he forgave ye
seek man. What needs it, said he, in repeating the same again to fatygate and
trouble both the seek man and the pressed: in repeating all one thing? If he
had confessed him to me in season, parauenture he should have made his will
better for his soul health, now take ye the charge. This i^dyfferency of the
seek sore agreued those solitary fathers, no^hyng contented that any morsel of
their pray should be cut out for ye parish pressed. But I went between them and
conclud^d so y^ their strife was ended. and the pressed anoyled the seek man,
and gave him our lords body. And after he was paid his money and went his way.


Died Caromenes than fellow after so great a te^pest?


Nay by saint Mary, a sharper storm followed by and by.


I pray the what was the cause?


Thou shalt here. There were flocked together in one house four ordres of
begging freres / the fifth ordre the which^ be called the crooked (the crouched
freres I would say) came in among them. Against which as it had been a child
base gotten, y^ other four arose all together making no little ado. and they
asked the fifth ordre when ever they died se a chariot of.v. wheles / or how
they durst make mo ordres of beggars tha^ there be Eua^gelystes. By the same
reason ^they said) bring in hyder all beggars which use to sit at bridges and
hye ways.


What said ye crouched freres to yt?


They asked the other fr^res again / how y^ chariot of the church went, at such
time when there was no ordre of beggers^ and again when there was only one, and
after three. for truly the nombre ( said they) of ye euangelystes hath nomore
affynyte with our ordres than with a dice, which on every side shewith.iiij.
corners. Who brought y^ Austin freres in to the ordre of beggars? or who y^
Carmelytes? or what time begged Augustine or Holy? for these they make the
actor of their ordres. These tho^derboltes with many other the crossed freres
died clatter out, and doubtless very manfully. But because they had none to
take part with them / therefore thinking the^ not able to resist the violence
of.iiii. such hostess, gave place / only threatening them very cruelly^


Than I trow there was nomore brabbling.


No mary. For this part taking and atonement against the fifth ordre was torn
in to an open fray. The francy scan and the dominican contended, that neither
the augustynyans nor the carmelytes were proprely called beggars / but rather
mungrelles, and chau^gelynges. This strife died so much increase, that plainly
I was afraid leest it should come to hand gripes and strokes.


Died the seek man abide all these brablynges?


These maters were not done at his bed side, but in a court by which joined to
the chambre. But all ye words came to the seek man / for they died not whisper
the matter, but it was spoken loud enough, and with full shawmes, as ye proverb
saith. And thou know most comynly y^ seek men are sharpe of hearing in
especially.


But how ended ye battle?


The seek man sent unto the^ his wife, to exhort them to keep silence a little
while, and said that he would end this variau^ce. And so desired, that for that
time the Augustynyens and the Carmelytes would depar^e / and {pro} missed that
they should lose nothing thereby. And said more over y^ so much meat should be
sent home to their houses: as the rest which tarried styll should have. But he
co^maunded y^ they should all four ordres be at his burying, and also the
fifth, and y^ they should every one have like portion of money. Nevertheless he
would in no wise that they should al sit together at diner, lest any trouble
should ensue at their meting.


Thou tell me of a right good house keeper / which at the point of death could
set in quietness so many bossy maters.


He had be^ many years a captain in wars. there are wont daily to spring up
such clamours among the soldiers,


Was he rich?


Very rich.


But it was evil gotten, with spoiling and sacrilege. or robbing holy places /
extorcions and bribes.


Such is the comyn facion of the capytaynes in wars: nor I dare not stiffly
swear that this man was altogyder clear and differing fro their manners. But as
far as I can perceive he gate more good with, polycy of wit than with vyolen^e.


How so?


He understood very well arythmetike or craft of nombryng.


What thereof?


What than? To the high captain he would sometime account ^xxx. M. soldiers,
wha^ there were scarcely.vii.M. And more over he paid to many of them never a
deal.


Certainly you show me a worthy craft of accounting.


And sometime he caused the wars by craft to continue and was wont also to
receive every month money of villages and towns: both of his enemies and
friends. of his en^myes: to save them harmless, of his friends to suffer them
to make peace with their enemies.


I know of old the manners of soldiers. but go forth in your tale.


Bernarde and Uyncent with certain other of their co^panyons tarried styll with
the seek man / the other which were departed had vytayles sent them.


Died not they agree well together which tarried styll in the house?


not always, they like hogs gru^ted I wot not wherefore, of y^ preferme^tes of
their bulls, but lest their deuyse should not come to pass, they dissembled for
that time. Here they brought forth his testament, and certain demands were
asked before wytnesses, of such things which they had concluded among
the^selues before.


I am very desirous to here what things they were.


I shall tell the chief points, for ye matter is somewhat tedious. There
remained his wife.xxxviii. years of aege / being a woman certainly very
comme^dable and wise. Two sons, the eldre was.xix. years of aege, and the
other.xv. And as many daughters, both within aege. Thus was it devised by his
testame^t / that his wife ( because they could not enforce her to be a Nonne)
should take the habit of a Bighyne, yt is an or^re between Nonnes and laykes.
The elder soon, because they could not entice him to be of any solitary
profession.


An old fox is taken but seldon in a snare.


Hastily after his fodders buri^ng they determined that he should in al haste
go to Rome / and there bye ye popes dispensation before his law full aege to be
made a pressed, to sing daily in Uatycanes temple, for his fodders soul. And yt
he should crepe on his knees every friday all ye holy stayres in Laterane.


Died he take all this willingly?


Even to be plain, as asses be wo^t to take upon them their carriages. More^r
yt the youngest soon should be professed to saint Frau^ceys, y^ elder daughter
to saint Clare, the youngest to saint Katherine. For they could bring nomore of
their purpose ^o pass. for George was mi^ded, because he wold have god more
bound to him, to have his wife and.iiii. children to be parted among the.v.
ordres of beggars / and there was great procurement thereto / but the wife and
the eldest soon were to old to agree thereto, either for fair words or foul.


A propre fashion of disinheriting.


The inheritance altogyder was in such wise divided, that after y^ charges of
the burying was taken out of all the hole, one part should inure to ye wife
upon this co^dycion / that she should live with the one half thereof / the
other half should be put in the place where she should oblige herself.
Fro^whens, if she at any time hereafter departed, all the same money should
remain to yt flock: Another like portion should be given to ye eldest soon, to
whom by and by after should be enjoined a journey toward Rome / and as much as
was sufficient to bye his bulls, and to paye his costs of meat and drink at
Rome. And if he refused to be made pressed, his porcio^ should than be divided
between the freres of saint Fraunceys, and of saint Domynyke / and yet I fear
me that he will not {per} form their iniu^ct^on / the young man appeared to
abhor so much fro^ holy ordres. Two porcyons should be put in to the monastery
which was content to take ye youngest soon. Other two parts also to the.ii.
monasteries where the daughters were but under this condition / yt if they at
any time hereafter refused to {pro}fesse ye life, yet all the money should be
in their custody, sauf, and in no wise diminished. Again on the other side, the
good father Bernardyne must have one of the porcio^s, and Uyncent another / and
half of one of the porcyons to ye Charter monks, for co^munyon and part taking
of all good works, which should be done in all the ordre, All the rest should
be distribute to poor people yt were privily kept / upon whom Bernardyne and
Uyncent thought it best bestowed.


you should have said as ye lawyers do, Quos ve^ quas.


After the will was red / they asked hi^ under these words. George balearike,
dost you being on live and hole memory approve this testame^t, which you lately
hast made of thyn own my^de? He answered / I do ap{pro}ue it. and is this thy
last and i^mutable will? it is. And you dost i^stytute and ordain me and fader
bachelor Uy^cent here: executors of thy last will? I do ordain. Than they
co^maunded him yet ones to subscribe it with his own hand.


How could he, than being at point of death?


Bernardin{us} did govern y^ seek man^es hand.


What died he subscribe?


These words. ye high displeasure of saint Frau^ceys and saint Domynyke may
come to hy^ which gooth about to chau^ge any thi^g her in.


But feared they not ye action called in the law Actio officiosi testamenti.


No, no: this action lies not in those things yt be dedicate to god / neither I
think y^ any man is so foolish to make any trouble with god. All these maters
finished, the wife and the children gave their right ha^des to the seek man.
swearing that they should observe that thing which they had received. After
these things they began to comyn (not without strife) of the funeral pomp. At
last this sente^ce had ye victory, that.ix. of of every one of ye.v. ordres
should be present in the honour of the.v. books of Moyses / and of the.ix.
ordres of au^gelles. And ye every ordre should have their cross borne before
them / and they should singe their morning songs. Moreover.xxx. ( beside such
as were kyn^e to him) should be hired, (for so many pieces of money was our
lord sold) all in black to bear ye torches. and for his honours sake.xii.
mourners. (this nombre is in ye honour of ye.xii apostles,) should go about the
corps. Next after should follow Georges own horse all in black, with his neck
so bound down to his knees as though he wold be scene to seek his master on the
earth. It was forthermore procured that the covering which should be cast over
him, should show on every party his arms. Likewise every torch and black
garment should ye same. The corps they purposed should be laid at the right
hand of the high alter in a tomb of marble, which should be made iiij. foot
high fro the the ground. He should lye in the top of it graven in a white
marble stone / all armed fro top to toe. neither might ye helmet lack his
crest. the crest was the neck of an Anocrotale. A target in the left arm / in
the which was his arms blazed in this wise, Three wild bores heeds all of gold
in a silver field. A sword by his side with a gilted pommel. The girdle was
gilted, and divided with studdes of precious stones. Golden spurs to his fete,
because he was a gentle ma^ of cote armour, under his fete should be set a
leopard, the brynk^s of his sepulker should have an epitaphye mete for a worthy
man. He was willing y^ his heart should be buried severally in a chapel of
saint franceys. He co^mitted ye other inward parties of his body to the parish
pressed, to be buried honourably in a chapel of our lady.


An honourable burying, but very chargeable. At venice a pore cobbler should
have more honour for a little cost. for company makes ornate and elygant the
bear, and there sometime six hundred monks: some in sleueles s^oppes, and other
some with copes will follow one corps.


I have scene that myself, and have sometime laughed at such foolish
vaynglories of poor me^. there goes fullers and curriers before: and cobblers
behind, and mo^kes in ye midst. thou would say they were mo^sters / neither
here was any other thing if you had scene it. It was also {pro}uided by George,
ye Barnardyne and Uyncent should decern by lots which of them should have the
highest place in the great pomp. And afterword other should doo so likewise,
lest any rumour or besynesse should be for the same. The parish pressed and his
clerks were appointed to the most inferior place, that was to go the foremost /
neither ye solitary fathers would suffer it otherwise.


He could not only or^yn an army to battle / but also other solemn tryu^phes
and po^pes.


It was also provided that the mass of Requiem which should be done by the
parish pressed should be in prick songe, for y^ more honour. While these things
and certain other were indeuysyng, the seek man shaked very sore, and died give
certain perfect toke^s that his last time was nigh at hand. The last act of the
comedy was therefore prepared.


Is it not yet at an end?


The popes bull was there rehearsed / in the which was granted remission of all
his sins quyte and clean / and all the fear of purgatory was taken away. Beside
al these al his goods was justified.


Such as was gotten by extortion and robbery?


Certainly even such as were gotten by ye law of battle or soldiery. But it
fortunate to be prese^t one Philip a man of law ye wyfs brother, which marked a
place in ye bull otherwise set than it ought to be / and caused suspicion that
it was but forged.


Nay, that was not done in time. he should have rather dysse^bled it, though
there had ben error therein / and the seek man should have done never the
worse.


I think the same. For the seek man was so troubled with this matter, that he
was not far of from desperation. And there father bachelor Uynce^t played the
man. He co^maunded George to be of a quiet mind, he said that he had auctoryte
both to correct any thing which was false in the bulls, either to restore any
thing y^ lacks. But if the bull deceive the, even very now I put my soul for
thine / y^ thine may come to heaven, and mine I give for ever to the darkest
pyt of hell.


But will god accept such changing of souls? and if he would, was this
provision for George with such a gauge suffycye^t? What and if the soul of
Uyncent was ( without any chau^gi^g at all) due to hell.


I showed you as ye matter was / but Uyncent finished tha^ ma^er. The patient
seemed to take a good stomach to him / by and by was red ye pardons, wherein
was promised to George to be part taker of all ye works which should be done by
the.iiii^ ordres and of the Charter monks.


I would be afraid lest I should be thirst down to the bottom of hell, if I
should bear such an unprofitable burden.


I speak of their good works: which doth no otherwise aggraua^e the soul ready
to depart, than feathers doth the bird.


To whom bequeath they their ill works?


To the landeskneyghtes of Germany.


By what auctoryte?


Of the gospel, saying to him that hath: it shall be given / and withal was
rehearsed the no^bre of masses and nocturnes, which should accompany the dead
man soul / truly it was an unreasonable nombre. After all these things, he was
confessed, and had absolution.


Dyed he thus?


Not yet. A matte of rushes was spread upon the ground, in such wise that the
upper part was lapped together, for to make as it were a similitude of a
bolster.


What me^t they by that?


They sparpled it all over with ashes, but very thinly, and there they laid the
sick man body. A gray freres cote was spread aboue him, but being halowed
before with a certain prayers and holy water. A cowl was put under his head,
for at that time it could not be put upon him, and with all was laid the bull
and the pardons.


A new manner of death.


But they affirm sty^fely y^ he devil hath no power over them which dies in
such fashion. So they said that both saint Martyne and saint Frauncys dyed.


But then their lives were no less virtuous. I pray the tell me what followed?


They reachyd the image of the cross, and a wax candle to the sick man. At the
sight of the cross he said, I was wont in battles to be defendyd with mine own
buckler, but now I will put this buckler against mine enemy, and kissed it, and
put it toward the left shoulder. To the holy candle he said: in time past I
have ben valyau^t in wars with spear, now I will shake this spear against the
enemy of souls.


Euyn like a man of war.


These words he spake last / for by and by his tongue was taken with death, and
with all the pangys of death came upon him. Barnardyne stood harde by him on
the right hand, and Uincent on the left side, both two load enough / the one
showed y^ picture of saint Fra^ceys, the other of saint Domynyke / the other
good holy fathers sparpled abroad about the chambre, mombled up besyly certain
psalms. Bernardyne with great out cries precelled his right ear, and Uyncent
the left.


What cried they?


Bernardyne said in this wise. George balearyke^ if thou now approve those
things, which we have done betwixt vs: bow down thy heed toward thy right side.
He died so. Uyncent on the other side said, be nothi^g adredde George / thou
hast saint Fra^ceys and saint Domynyke thy defenders, care nothing at all.
Remember what a great sort of merits, what a strong Bull. brefely, remember
that my soul is pledged for thine, If there were any jeopardy, if thou
understand what I say, and also a lowest ye same, bow down thy heed toward the
left side. He died so. And again with a like outcry, they said both. if you
think surely all these things thirst down my hand / and with the same he thirst
down his hand. And so in bowing his heed here and there / and putting down
ha^des, was almoost.iii. hours past. And shortly after when George began to
gasp, there Bernardyne standing up {pro}nou^ced the absolution / which he could
not parfitely finish, before George was departed. this was a little after
midnight. in the morning the Anothomy was made.


What noisome thing was fou^de within him?


Thou remember me in good time / for it was gone out of my remembrance. A pyece
of lead cleaved in the skyn^e, which closes the heart and the lights about, and
doth separate them from the mylte and the liver, called Diaphragma.


How came it there?


His wife showed that he was ones stricken with a gon^e stone / and thereof the
physicians conjectured that a pyece of ye lead moltyd, tarried styll within his
body. By and by, the corps all to cut and dilanyate as well as it would be, was
put in a gray freres cote. After diner, the burying was done with such and like
solemnity, as it was decreed before.


I never herd of a more curious death, nor a corps more ambitious. But I
suppose thou would not have this spoken abroode.


Wherefore?


Lest the hurnettes would be an angered.


There is no jeopardy at all. For if these things be godly which I show, it is
their profit that the people do know them / if they be otherwise, so many as be
good among them, will give me thanks which have showed forth such, whereby some
correct with shame, may refrain like deeds. Also such as be sy^ple, may take
heed lest they be drawn in to like error / for there be among this sort great
wise men, and very godly, which has often complained to me, that by the
supersticion improbyte or lewdness of a few, the hole order is brought to
hatred of good men.


Thou say very right, and boldly / but I am very desirous to know, how
Cornelius dyed.


Like as he lived grievous to no man, so dyed he. He was every year grieved
with the fibre, co^myng to him at certain times. The same ( both for because he
was somewhat in age: for he was past three score years) are for other causes
more than was wont infebled the man, and it appeared that he felt before that
his fatal day was at hand. For the fourth day before he dyed, was Sunday, our
lords day, he went to the temple, was confessyd to his curate, he herd the
co^mune preaching and mass / and after the mass was done, he was howseled, and
so went home.


Used he no Physicians?


Only one he counselled, but he was no less a good ma^, then a good Physician,
his name is Iacobus Castrutius.


I know him very well^ There is no more pure man.


He answered yt his friend should not lack his diligence / but he thought there
was more succour in god than in physicians. Cornelius died as gladly accept his
saying, as though he had showed most certain hope of life. Therefore albeit
that after his power, he was always very liberal toward the po^re, even than
all that might be spared fro^ necessary aid of his wife and children, was
distributed to ye poor and noddy men / and not to the ambitious beggars, which
we comynly mete in every place / but to such as were to be co^mended, which
fought against poverty, with al their deuyse and power. I desired him to lye
him down / and rather to call the pressed to him, than to fatygate with labour
his feeble body. He gave answer, that his special study was ever to help his
friends, if he might, rather than to put the^ to pains / neither he would be
unlike to himself at the time of his dying / neither truly he lay down any
more, but y^ last day, and part of y^ night, wherein he departed out of this
life. So^tyme for werinesse of his body he walked with a staff / sometime
reposed in a chair. He went seldom to bed, but in his clothes, and his heed
raised upward. All this time he either gave one thing or other to relyue the
poor / but ^n especial to them which were known poor, and dwelled nigh to him,
or e^les ^e red such things in holy scripture, which provokes a man conscience
toward god, and also declares his charity towards vs. And when he by reason of
his werynesse could not rede himself, than he herd some friend redyng before
him. Often times he exhorted with a veheme^t desire, his family to love one
another, and to love ye truth. He also lovingly conforted them which were
pensive and sorrowful for his death. He gave ofte^ monycion to such as he put
in trust, that nothing of his dettes should be unpaid.


Made he his will?


Yes, lunge before, in time of his helthe / for he denied utterly that they
were called testaments, which were made of such as lye on dyeng: but rather
foolish dotinges.


Did he bequeath nothing to monasteries, or to noddy men therein.


Nothy^g at all. I ( said he) have for my part distribute those little goods
which god has sent me. Therefore now as I give the possession of them to other:
so I give also the dispensation and ordering. And I trust that they will
dispose the^ more have done my self.


Did he not call to him such holy me^ as George did.


Never one. Neither was there any body at all with him, saving his own family,
and two special friends of his.


I marvel what he meant.


He said utterly that he wold be onerous to no mo at his death, than he was at
his nativity.


I desire instantly to here the end of this matter.


Thou shalt here it by and by. Thursday cam, he lay styll upon his bed, feeling
extreme werynes of his body / the curate was sent for, and anoyled him, and by
and by gave him the body of our lord, without any confession at all. For he
said there was no scrupe and doubt at all in his mind, The pressed began to ask
of him, with what pomp, and in what place^ he would be buried. He said again,
bury me in such wise as ye wold bury a christen man of the lowest degree. Nor I
care not in what place ye lay my wretchyd body, which shall be fou^de in the
last day as well out of one place as other, where so ever it be hyd / nor I
regard any thing at all the pomp of burieng. Shortly after, wha^ me^cion was
made of ye ringing of belles, tre^tals, and years minds, of bulls, of bying
part taky^g of merits. Tha^ answered he thus, my curate, I shall do never ye
worse, if no bell at all knoll for me. If it will please you to singe one bare
mass for me it shall be more tha^ need. Either if there be any thing else,
which ( because of the comyn custom of the church) may without offence of such
as be infirm persons scarcely be left out, yt I {per}mytte to be at your
advise. Neither I am minded to bye any man^es prayers, either to bereave any
man his merits. Haboundaunce of merits flows over in Christ / and also I trust
that ye prayers and merits of all thry^ten men, ( if I be a living membre) doth
prousfyte me / Al my hope is in.ii. bulls and privileges / the one is of my
offences, that ye chief pastor Iesus christ hath clean taken them away, nayly^g
it to the cross. the other is that which he wrote and sealed with his precious
blot / whereby he put vs in certainty of everlasting life, if so be that we put
all our hole trust in him. God forfend that I armed with merits, and bulls,
should provoke my lord god, to come in to iugement with his bondsman / being
certain of this^ that all which be living, shall not be justified in his sight.
I do appel therefore from his justice, to his mercy / for so much as it is
without measure, and ineffable. After he had spoken these words, the pressed
departed. Corneli{us} being merry and glad (as though he had conceived a great
hope of helthe) co^maunded that such places of holy scripture should be
rehearsed to him, as were written to co^ferme the hope of ^esurrection, and the
reward of i^mortalyte. As for example the text of Esaye declaring the death of
Ezechias which was deferred, and the ca^tycle. Moreover the.xv. chapytre of ye
first epistle of Paule to the Corynthiens. Also out of saint Iohn^ the
euangelyst of the death of Laser{us} / but namely ye history of Chrystes
passion, after the euangelystes. With what a mind devoured he every thyng^
sighing at some things / and when he herd some other he ( lifting up his hands)
gave thanks. At the hearing of divers other things, he waxed very merry, and
showed him outwardly glad / and at many sayings, he caste out many short
prayers. After diner, when he had taken a little sleep, he co^maunded that one
shulder^ hearse to him the.xij. chapytre of saint Iohn^s Gospel, unto the end
of the history. At which time you would have said the man had ben cler^ly
transfigured and afflate with a new spirit, Now it drew towards night, he
^alled to him his wife and children. There (his feeble body being reryd up
asmoche as he could suffer) he spake to them in this wise: Most dere wife, gods
pleasure is now to depart them whom he has unite before / but this separacyon
shall be but bodily, and y^ for a very short time. All thy diligence, love, and
pytye, which thou were wont in time past to bear toward me and those most dere
chylderen, turn all towards them. Neither think that thou cannest any wise do
higher pleasure to god or me, than if thou nourish, bring up, and institute
them which god has given vs twain, as fruit of our marriage: that they may
become Chrystes servants. As towards them therefore double thy love, and think
that the portion of my love is translate all into the / which if thou doest (as
I doubt not but thou will) they shall in no wise be said Orphans. But and if
thou doest iterate matrimony. At that word the wife burst out in weeping, and
began for to swear devoutly, that ^he would never think of marrying again. Here
Cornelius said. My most dere beloved sister in Christ, if our lord Iesus Christ
will vouchsafe for to grant the this purpose, and spiritual strength, slake not
of thy part from such an heavenly calling / For that shall be both more
convenient for thyn own self, and also these children. But if so be that the
infirmity, and weykenesse of the flesh call the to mary again / know thou that
my death sets the at liberty from the law of our matrimony / but you art not at
large thereby from the faithful promise, which you hast made in both our names:
to cure and bring up our comyn children. But as touching marriage, use that
liberty which god hath {per}mytted the. Only I pray and put you in remembrau^ce
both, that thou do choose a husband with such manners, and thou also use ^he
t^warde him in such wise that he may be led by his mere goodness, or provoked
through thy co^modite or towardness to love his stepe son^es. Take heed you
dost not bind thy self to any vow. Keep thyself at liberty to god and our
children, whom you must so bry^g up in al mekenesse, yt thou be no less
cyrcu^spect / and ware lest they do addict themselves to any volu^tary purposed
living / unto the time it may appear by their aege and discretion, to what
manner of living they be most apt. Than after he torn toward his children, and
exhor^ed them to the study of virtue, and obeye their moder, and one to love
antoher. These things ended, he kissed his wife, and to his children he gave
his blessing, making over them the sign of the cross, praying god to send them
good mind, and Christ's mercy. After this, he looked upon all that stood by^
and said: God that rose again in the morning, will vouchsafe to morrow before
the so^ne rise, to euocate and call out this simple soul from the sepulchre of
this body, from the darkness of this mortality, into his heavenly light. I will
not that these young children shall be fatygate and wery^d with vain watchings.
Let all oth^r goo to bed also / one is sufficient to watch with me, whom I
would have for to ^eherse some holy scripture. When the night was past, a
little after four of the clock, in the presence of all that were in the house,
he co^maunded one to rede out a ^owde the hole psalm which our lord praying,
said at the time he suffered his pasiyon. That done, he commanded one to bring
him an halowed candle, and the sign of the crucifix. He toke the candle in his
hand, saying, the lord is my lightening, and my helthe / whom shall I fear? He
also kissing the cross, said: The lord is protector, and defender of my life,
whom shall I therefore be adred of^ ^y and by, he held his hands together upon
his breast, as a man in fervent prayer, lifting up his eyes toward heaven,
said: Lord Iesu, take my spirit. And shortly after, he shit his eyes, as though
he would goo to sleep / and therewith, with a soft blast, he yielded up the
goste. Thou would rather have said he had ben on sleep, than dead.


I never herd of death more quiet.


He was of like fashion in all his life time / both twain were my frendys.
Perchance I judge not indifferently, whe^her of them departed this life more
like a christian. Thou Mercolphus, which art not partial, shalt more rectetely,
discern.


So I will do, but at a convenient season.


Finis.
Thus ends y^ dyaloge called Funus, made by doctor Erasmus.
Erasmus.


A good and a godly admonition or warning, very behooveful for every christen
man to loke upon.
GOd hath apparelled the glory of heue^ to them that love him, and keep his
co^maundementes / and to them that (of that they have and done) praise not them
self, no be not proud thereof, and after their hability departen gladly to the
pore and noddy: and set not their hertes principally, but in our lord: And to
them yt the euils^ the pains, and the tribulacions that com^ to them, suffren
patiently for the love of god. And for to have this great glory, ou^ lord
admonesteth vs that we be alway^ ready, and keep vs fro sin. And that w^ put
not our hertes principally in this ca^tyfe world, which is nothing but a
ly^tell passing, full of weeping, of sorrows and of anguishes, which we shall
leue^ And take none heed of the hour without to bear any thing with vs, save
the good deeds and the evil that we have done. And our body caitiff, shall be
covered with the earth, as a foul stinking carrion, and worms shall eat and
wrote therein. Our lord promises not to vs to morrow, to the end that our
hertes and our principal intention be in him, and in his love. For we ought to
love god, and ^o remember oft and devoutly how the sweet Iesus vouchedsafe to
humble him self for vs, and descend fro his glory of heaven, into ye wo^be of
the glorious virgin Mary, and become a man and our brother, and suffered d^the
and passion for vs / and howe he made vs of nought, and semblably to him /
which might have made vs ( if it had pleased him) like unto toots and other
worms. If we know well all the graces that he hath done to vs, and thank and
give him ^aude therefore that is the thing aboue all ^ther, by which we may
most soon and most lightely have his love and his grace: much pleasant is it
unto god, when one knowlegeth the graces and the benefits that he hath done for
vs, and when he is remercyed and thanked therefore.

Example. It is red that the great Chauntre of Paris, found on a time in a
field, a converse, ^ that is to say, a brother, and no priest, of the order of
Cisteaulx) keeping sheep, which was contemplatife and devout toward god, and
wept oft in beholding a crapaulde or toot. The chauntre demau^ded him wherefore
he wept. He answered to him, saying: I ought well to weep for my sins, and give
thankynges to god, which has made me to his semblance. For if it had pleased
him, he had well made me like unto this crapaulde or toot. Thus this good man
thanked and remercyed god. Than let vs rendre and give graces and than^kynges
to our lord of all his benefits, and let vs enioy^ in him, and sing we in our
hertes with great joy / for we be y^ sons and the daughters of god, made and
formed to his semblance, brethren and siste^en of Iesu Christ, and bought and
rede^ed with his precious blood, fed with his precious body, fellows to angels
^f heaven, Coheriters (but if it be lunge of ^ur selfes) for ever more, without
end, ^f the glorious royalme / to the which ^rynge vs the sw^te and debonair
Ie^u Christ. Amen.

At London, by Robert copland, for Iohan Byddell / otherwise Salisbury. the.v.
day of January, And be for to sell at ye sign of our lady of pity next to Flete
bridge. 1.5.3.4.

Cum priuilegio regale.



An epistell of the famous doctor Erasm{us} of Rotterdam / unto the reverend
father and excellent prince / Christofer bishop of Basil / co^cernyng the
forbedynge of eating of flesh / and like constitutions of men. andc.


