How to sail from Amsterdam going out to Sea.
First, When you shall Sail from Amsterdam to Thyoorte, keep you in the middle
channel. And when you are without Thyoorte, then go Northeast so long, till you
have brought Markerkerke with the lowe Land o^ Adam. And then keep so, till
that you have brought Amsterdam a good way open to the northwards of the Chapel
of Thyoort, and then keep your course Northeast and by east, and East Northeast
till you have brought Adam by East Merken, and then you are past Pampus. Then
go northeast towards Urke, and when you see Urke bear northeast and by north
from you, or more Northerly, then are you in the right course. And having
observed these points, you shall find hard ground, and then again soft ground,
and a better depth, and then are you in the right Cha^nel. But if Urke bear
northeast from you, the^ are you very nigh to the north shore sand. Then go now
and then more westerly, till you have brought the Church and the houses in one,
and then go west northwest with the Hoft, and keep the church and the houses in
one, until you have brought Memelick a little without the land of the Uen, and
keep it so, till you have brought the end of the Uen directly over Ankenson,
keeping this course and the marks in one till you bring Grosbrocke and it
together, they have two sharp steeples, and keep Memelick open to the
northwards of the Castle, as much as the breadth of the Castle or more. These
are the marks of the Channel, you shall have 4. fathom, and in the best 5.
fath. 3. foot less, and hard streamy ground.

Item, to sail from the Hoft to the Creel, you must go northwest and by north.
After as the wind and tide will serve, the marks of the Creel, is Twiske church
a little to the westward of the Corn mill, which is on the west side of
Memelicke, and Mirnes a flat steeple which lies at the south end of Cliff,
these brought together are the marks of Creel, and the Buys lie in four fathom,
and in the best deep is five fathom, The Course from Creel to the plat is north
and by east, the marks are Pendergas flat Steeple standing within the Land, and
Buerthwisen a Village in the midway between Worwolt and Panderga, (to wit)
Buerthwisen, and then next Panderga, and Mirnes is the third mark, and then by
east Stauerne you shall see a sharpe steeple. These are the marks of the plat,
and doth lye in two fathom, and in the best deep is but three fathom.

Item from the plat to the Tuffler, the course is North Northeast, the marks is
a small sharpe steeple which stands at the Corner of Panderga, Mirnes,
Molquerum, Hemelium, and the long Buerthwisen: going by these marks you shall
come to the Bay, which lies in two fathom ^ at a lowe water, and between the
plat and Tuffler doth the should of the Ulack lye, a southeast and a Northwest
moon doth make there a full sea.

Item from the Tuffler to go to the westwards of Worcom, you must go north and
by west, or more Westerly, until you have two little Steeples northeast of you,
and shut one in another, they stand upon the sea side, and when you have
brought them open one from another, then you shall see other two small steeples
something to the Eastwards, then edge northwards something offwardes keeping
them open one from an other, as far as the other past which stand by the sea
side: Then have your thwart marks for the Buy is a high house at the East end
of a Kowdom, and comes in at the South end of Hind, And these are the marks of
the Buy or Tun that lies west from worcom, and lies scarce in three fathom. And
the best depth is three fathom, and is soft ground.

Item, from by west Worcem, to Yeghelhocke, Northwards, the thwart marks is a
long village by the Seaside, coming into a valley, and in the same valley comes
a small steeple, and against these marks the Buy or Tun of Yeghelhocke lies at
three fathom and a half, the best depth is four Fathom soft ground. The West
shore is very deep, the Eastland shore is flat or plate.

Item, from Yeghelhocke to the middle groaned, the course is north, the land
marks are two sharpe steeples, northeast from you: those twain brought
together, there lies the middle ground, on which is four Fathom, the best depth
is six fathom, and the west part is very deep, and then go north northwest with
Swanballick.

Item the thwart marks, for the Buy of Swanballicke are Bolstwert, brought open
a little by south Cormure by a little round house. These are the marks for the
Buy which lies toward the East shore in three Fathom, you may sail by them as
ye come from within outwards, but as ye come outwards you may not sail by the
west shore.

Item, then from Swanballicke to Skutland, the course is northwest, until you
have brought Panderga to the northward Yoschwisen, which is a round village
with a little flat Steeple, and is to the Southward of Macom the next to it,
and keep Panderga in the midst between the South end of Macom, and that round
village, then can you not go amiss. And when you have brought Panderga near to
Macom, then are you nigh the north land, and if Panderga bee near the round
village, then are you nigh to the Southland, therefore keep Panderga always in
the middle between that village and Macom, as long as you can see them, till
you come about Kashock.

Item, the mark of Skutsand, is a flat Steeple which shows over the blockehouse
of Harling, the Land marks is Bloswert Northwards of the Stintsen, which stands
on the Northwards of Women's, that Buy lies in six Fathom of the North shore,
and is very deep, and in a manner shore deep, and the best depth there is seven
or eight ^ ^ fathom You may sail by the south shore by your lead.

Item, the course from Skutsand to Caishocke is west northwest, The marks of
Caishocke are these, Fromiker with Harling, or very nigh unto the houses of the
Town of Harling, and upon the north land lies the Buy at five fathoms.

Item the course from Caishocke to Woolfehook is north northwest, and you may
bee bold to sail by the east shore, from Caishocke to Woolfehooke and the
channel, is ten or twelve fathom deep, and the west shore is there very steep
to the Castle.

Item, from Woolfehook to Schierinchalles the course is North and by West, and
the best depth is seven or eight fathoms, and then from Schierinchalles to
Langersande, the course is northwest, there you may not sail too near the
shore, as you come from within outwards: these two Buys (to wit) Woolefhook and
Langersand, are no marks to make account of, but Woolfehooke lies also on the
east side, at 4. fathoms, and Langersand likewise lies in the same side at five
Fathoms, and coming from without inwards, you may sail along on the east side
of Langersand by Schierinchalles: upon the west side coming inwards, keep you
at seven fathoms, and you cannot doe amiss.

Item, from Langersand to the Castle, the course is north, the east side is
shallow and flat.

Item the course from the Creel to the South Buy of Wyringen flats, is west
northwest. And when you have brought Twiske in the midst between the two
Steeples which is Derdoes, and Almerdorpe, then take heed you come no nearer to
that flat with any ship, that draws much water, especially at a lowe water, and
then set of northwest and by west. Here a south east and northwest Moon makes a
full sea. And when the Moon is east or west, then is it there still water, and
best tune to sail over it.

Item, the marks of the souther Buy from the flat of Wiringen, is Twiske beyond
Almerdorp, and the thwart marks is Cleuerst when it comes by south the west end
of the Church of Wyringen.

Item, from the south Buy, to the next Buy or Tun by Scorn, the course is
northwest and by north, and this Buy lies of the we^t shore of three fathom, a
quarter less. Then must you keep by the east shore, that is the deeper side,
the Mark is the Mill on the south end of the River.

Item, from Scorn to the North buy, the course is North northwest, The east
shore is flat, and the best of the Channel is three Fathoms at lowe water, the
West shore is the deepest, the thwart marks for the North Buy, are two Towers
standing to the East wards by Wyringen brought in one and the Buy lies in three
Fathoms of the wester shore.

Item from the North Buy to the Nese, keep the North Buy with Memelick, so far
as you can see, till you bring those two Steeples or Towers into one, and then
shall you have water enough. And then run on north and by west, and keep off
from the Wester shore, for that is flat, and the easter shore is deeper. And in
the right channel is seven fathom deep about the Buy. And marks of the Nese
that is westward is a steeple by Wyringen, brought a little way by West the
uttermost houses of Wyrengen, and lies towards the East shore in 6. fathom: You
must then go more Westerly with the west shore in five fathom, and keep so till
the Watermill come without the north end of the river, keeping so till you find
ten or twelve Fathom, then go west northwest to Uoge^sand, and then you have
both the shores very deep. And when you come near to Uogelsand, you shall see
Coger church to the westward of the houses which stand by the west of the mill,
then keep Coger Church to the westwards of the houses yt stand westward of the
mil, so long till the high st^eple come without the end of the houses, which
stand to the northeast of that high Steeple, keeping them so a little without
the houses, and so can you not miscarry on the south shore, keep in five Fathom
till you come to the Rood, which is the Herne about Weringerdicke.

How to sail to Amsterdam coming out of the Sea.
ITem from the Bus inwards to Hobsand, the course is south a little to the
Eastwards.

Item the thwart marks from the Bus is the Cape upon the corner of Schellinck,
and the south end of the downs of Schellinck, and lies in five Fathom on the
easter shore, and in the deepest is nine or ten Fathom, and on the West side is
deep till you be past Hobsand, and being past Hobsand, the fore flood sets you
thwart over to the Buy. And you may go that way, when you come from without
inwards. Therefore you must keep your self in deep water. And the sore Ebb doth
run again directly towards the Fleland.

Item, the Marks of H^sand is the easterliest sharpe Steeple upon Schellinck,
brought a little to the eastwards of the long house and the sand banks of
Fleland. Those brought a little within the white Leden, and thereupon the Buy,
and lies in six Fathom by the east shore.

Item from Hobsand to Langersande, the course is south and somewhat westerly,
come not nearer to the east shore then seven Fathom, and so you may not sail
fast by Langersand, for the Buy lies in five fathom of the East shore, and lies
at the end of Langersand, where you use to turn into Getsing for to sail to
Harling. Then from Langersand to Schierinchalles, the course is southeast, come
not in any less water then seven fathom, and you may not come ne'er
Schierinchalls: on the west shore thwart over against Schierinchalls you shall
have 10. or 11. fathom.

Item, from Schierinchalls to Woolfhooke, the course is South southeast, set
your course along the west shore, and keep in six or seven fathom. About
Woolfehook it is eight Fa^ham, and the easternmost Buy lies in four fathom, ye
may sail hard by it when ye come out of the sea inwards, therefore keep ye in
deep water.

Item, from Woolfhook to Raishook, the course is southeast and by south. Then
you may keep by the East shore in four or five Fathom, till you come to
Raishooke. In the maine Channel, is eleven or twelve fathom, the west side is a
shore almost steep too. The after flood sets into the old Ulye, the marks of
Raishooke is Franker, brought open to the Eastwards of the town of Harling, a
little by the west Mil, which is to the westwards of the Steeple of Harling.
Here doth the Buy lye in five Fathom.

Item, from Raishooke to Scutsand the course is east southeast, until you have
brought the Beacon southeast of Raishooke, and thwart of you, and then within a
while you shall have sholder water: the south shore is flat but you may well
sail by it, the best depth shall be five fathom or there abouts, and then you
shall see Marcum bear southeast from you, which stands by the water side with a
mil, and to the southward of Marcum doth lye a little round village with a flat
steeple, and between this Village and the south end of Marcum stands a flat
Tower, and is called Panderga, keep this Tower in the middle between the middle
of this Village, and the south end of Marcum, and so you cannot take any hurt
on neither shore. And if Panderga bee nearer to Marcum, then are you by the
north shore, and if Panderga bee next the Village, then are you by the
Southland, therefore keep Panderga in the middle, until you have brought
Winaldom over the highest of the Town of Harling, and then you shall have deep
water. Then have you the Beaco^ of Doueballigh upon the thwart marks of
Scutsand, which is Winaldom with the blockehouse of Harling and Bulswert by
North, the two Stenghen lies by north Wocustaem, and the Buy lies by the North
shore in six Fathom and it is steep too.

Item from Scutsand to Swanbalch, the course is northwest and southeast* There
you may not sail near t^e east shore, and yet with an after flood and a fresh
gale of wind at a still water, you may come ne'er to the Easter shore. The
flood runs southward when the moon is S. or N. and the ebb again runs
northwards so long as the Moon is E. or w. yet notwithstanding, a southeast or
northwest M. makes a high water. And here the streams sets to ye westwards and
like wise upon the flats. And about Swanebalch, you may keep by the west shore,
but take heed that you come not in less depth then fine fathom.

Item, the thwart marks from the Buy to Swanebalch, is Bolswart brought over a
little round house, which stands to the southward of Curmor, and against that
doth lye the buy on the east side, and lies in three fathom water.

Item from Swanebalch to the middle ground, ye course is south southeast and
north northwest, keep the Buy of the middle ground lying about Hind to go by,
and so go ye well. And between the two Buys you may bee boldest towards the
west shore, and yet you may sail hard by the East shore: when you come from
without inwards, you shall find the buy of the middle ground to lye in four
fathoms, or there abouts of the east shore.

Item the marks of the middle ground, are two sharpe steeples and they lie
northeast fro^ you, the one is called Arom and the other Peningen, these are
the thwart marks, and you shall see likewise two flat Steeples, by east
Harling, which are called Winaldom and Middelum, those twain are the land
marks, and these two Churches must be brought both in one.

Item from the middle ground to Yeghelhooke the course is south, the East shore
is flat, and the west shore is steep^ too, the thwart marks of Yegelhooke, is a
village upon the water side to be brought in a gut or valley, and directly upon
this Gut or valley, comes in sight a small Steeple: these are the marks of the
Buy. And Yeghelhooke lies on the east side at three fathom and a half.

Item, from Yeghelhooke to the west of Workum, the course is south, the east
shore is flat, and the West shore, not so flat, in the Channel is soft ground,
the thwart marks to the westwards of Workum, you shall see a sharpe steeple
lying far within the land, to the northwards of Hindelopen, and when they come
with the houses standing by North Hindelopen, and thwart of Hindelopen there
lies the Buy in two fathom ^ at a lowe water in the best depth is three fathom,
hard ground. Then west of Workum to the Tuffler, the course is south and by
East, Easterly: so long till the marks of Tuffler, that is Panderga a flat
steeple to the southwards of Uorwold within the land, and you shall see a
little steeple come over Core, of Panderga. These are the land marks of that
Buy, the thwart marks are Hemellum, the country houses of Molquellum and Myrus
flat steeple, keeping along these, you shall come to the Tuffler, which lies in
two fathom ^/2.

Item, from the Tuffler to the plat, your course is south southwest, according
as the wind or stream doth serve, between both these Buys lies the sholdes of
the Ulacke, and you must keep Panderga in one with the Countri^ houses and by
south, so long till you have brought Mirus which is a flat steeple to the
Eastwards of Stauerre state, and these are the thwart marks of the Plat, and
lies at two fathom ^. The land marks are the country houses standing scant half
way betwixt Uorwold and Panderga (to wit) the country houses next to Panderga,
and these marks being in one, there you shall find the Buy which lies in three
fathom.

Item from the Plat to Creel, the course is south and by West, and going so,
you shall now and then have deep water, and so go till you have brought Tuyex
by west the corn Mill, which stands by west Memelicke. These are the la^d
marks, and the thwart marks is Myrus, a little flat steeple, which comes in at
the south end of the Eliffe: thes^ marks being in one, there lies the Buy of
the Creel in 4. fathom, the best depth is five fathom.

Item, from the Creel to the Hoofed, the course is southeast, go so until there
appear a sharp Steeple at the South end of the Cliff, and bring Grootbrooke and
that in one. These are thwart marks of the two Buys, and then Memelick steeple
brought by North the Castle, as far as tho Castle is broad or more, that is
likewise a thwart mark: the land marks is one end of the Uen, with the east
church of Ankeusen. The Creeple lies in three fathom large. And Hoofed lies in
four Fathom toward the east shore, and the Creeple lies on the wester shore,
the best depth is scarce 5. fathom and hard ground.

Item, from the Hoofed to Urk, the course is east southeast till you have
brought Medenblincke a little without ye land of the Uen, going so till you
bring the Church of Urke within the houses, and keep it so till you come near
unto Urk, and now and then edge to the southward, till the church of Urk bear
almost north northeast from you, and then go southeast with Pampus. And when
you are come so nigh unto Pampus, that you can see Amsterdam with the Chapel of
Tyort, keeping your course so until Merkerkerke bee brought in the plain land
of Uidam, then keep Merkerkerke so of you till you come unto Tie, and keep you
in the mid channel till you come to Amsterdam.

Item, now for to sail from Huysdwinen inwards, go Northeast and by East, for
the lands are steep to, on either side and cannot well be sounded: Therefore
keep your course so until the Churh at the east end come to the East of the
highest and most easterly f^rme house, which stands to the westward of the
Church: and doing thus you can take no hurt by Burksand. Then go northeast so
long till the highest spire steeple appear without the houses which stand to
the northeast of Howberich, and keep those Steeples still by north those
houses, so long till you have brought the church in the Cooch, which is without
a steeple, and covered with blew slates, nigh unto the mill which stands
between Oosterend and the Duaell, and go east southeast, and keep the Chu^ch
and the Mill together as long as you can see them, and then you shall see the
water mill that stands on the other side of Wieringhen, will come between the
Dover and the other corn mill: keep this course towards the West shore in five
fathom, and at seven fathom y^ shall have the Buy which is the best depth.

Item, the marks of the Buy upon the Nes is the westward steeple: brought a
little without the mos^e westerly houses of Wieringhen, and doth lie at five
fathom on the East shore, and so you may direct your course. Therefore ke^p by
the west shore, from the Nes Buy, to the North Buy, which lies on the flattes,
the course is south and by east, and then when you have brought two sharpe
steeples over Wieringhen in one: then shall you have 4. or 5. fath. there you
must stay with Ships of great draught to be lighted, The west shore is flat:
the east shore is deepest, then going south and by east, within a while you
shall have sholder water, that is to say 3. fathom ^ less at lowe water. And
when you come so near that you can see the Buy thwart Memelicke, then you shall
find the norther buy of the Ulack: and the Buy lies in 2. fath. ^ at lowe
water, and lies on the west shore, you must sail by the east side: the thwart
marks of this Buy are two easterly steeples brought in one.

Item from the norther Buy to the other Buy thwart of Sochorne, the course is
south southeast: the marks is the Mill on the South end, and lies in two Fathom
1/^ against the middle of the west shore, you must sail by it east.

Item from Sochorne to the south Buy, the course is south southeast, and lies
in two fathom 1/^ between these 2. Buys lies the shallow of Ulack: the thwart
marks of the south buy of the Ulacke, are 5. or 6, houses brought a little by
south, the most westerly Steeple of Wieringhen, and these houses are called
Cleuern, the land ma^kes is a sharpe steeple by west Memelick, which you must
bring over Almerdorp, Almerdorp hath a little flat Steeple.

Item from the south Buy of the Ulacke to the Creille the course is east
southeast, and to keep the right Channel, run southeast and by east so long
till you find deep water, or till you have the land of Creel, that is Myrus, at
the south end of Cliff.

Item, when you come from by north inwards, and will sail to Ankewsen, then
bring that high red house to the westward of the steeple so that you may see
between them, and keep so till the west end of it come right over that great
high Farm house which stands by north the Watermil, and these are the marks of
the first Buy, then go south southwest towards the wester shore in two Fathom,
and then off again into two Fathom 1/^ the thwart marks of the other Buy is
Boecaspell, brought over that Farm house, the land marks are to bring the Mill
by south of Ankewsen, a little by East of that high stone house which stands at
the south end, and against that doth lye the Buy, then keep your course by the
west shore. Upon a flowing water you may sail fast by the East shore coming
inwards.

Item, the thwart marks of the third Buy is Grotebrooke, brought over the same
farm house to the Northwards of the water Mill. The land marks of the same buy
is a stone house which stands at the north end opening fro^ the Steeple, so as
you may see between them: these are the land marks of the third Buy.

Item to know the land marks of the Buy to the southw^ds of Ankeusen: next to
Ankeusen the watch house by the gate being brought by East the Steeple: And by
these marks when the Mill comes in on with the quire of Boecaspell, there shall
you find the Buy on the East shore.

Item the land marks of the most southerly buy, is the little tower of the
hospital, being a little by west of a little steeple that stands upon the tower
that the anchors do hang upon: the thwart marks is a sharpe steeple brought on
the south end of Buerthwisen nigh unto a high Farm house: with these marks lies
the southernmost Buy.

Item, now it is necessary that al men should know that these creeks and
streams before specified, are to be understood for waters of pilotage, or
lademanage: therefore by the Sea right it is plain, that the Moister of any
Ship sailing these streams, and refusing to take in a pilot or lodesman and
that thereby the Ship doth perish, and miscarry: he is bound to make
restitution to the Merchants for their goods.

These following are the Seven Lands of Yotland. Witholm, Ameren, Dil, Kim,
Menow, Fanow, Numink.

Of Bombergen.
Item from Bombergen, to the Elue, the land lies northwest, and southeast, and
are distant 52. leagues. And a south and north Moon makes a full Sea in all
those havens. And like wise in Yotland.

Item, Bombergen is a flat long Hill, and on the south end of it stands a
steeple, and to the north part of the same northeast end, doth likewise stand a
steep Hill or Tower, and from that are high round Sand hills, as though it were
salt houses all along even to the Holmes: and the course from Bombergen to the
holmes, is North northeast, and they are distant a 11. leagues.

Item, the riff lies along between Bombergen and the holmes west, or
thereabouts in the seawards.

Item, in all havens between Bombergen and the Elue and thereabouts, a south or
north Moon makes a full Sea.

Of Friezeland side.
Item the Coast of Frizeland lies along, East northeast and west southwest.

Item, the Eider and the Holy land, lie east and by north, and west and by
south one from an other, and are distant two small kennings.

Item, Ripen lies from the holy land Northeast and by north, two great kennings
a sunder.

Item, the holy land and the Shilling, lye northeast and by east, and south
west and by west one from an other, and are distant 31. leagues.

Item, you may sail into the south Havens, at 5, fathom.

Item, you shall come no near the Holy Land on the westerside, then nine or ten
fathom so the Northwards, for from the Steene at some places it is seven Fathom
deep.

How to go in with Holy land.


Item to sail from the Holy land to the Elue, the cours^ lies south and by
east, and distant two kennings.

Item, he that will ride under the holy land, and comes from the west, let him
not come any nearer by the west part then ten fatha^, so long as you can see
between the Monk^ and the high Cliff, and then you may go boldly with the south
shore in four fathoms, by that side or five.

Item, when the Cliff bears southwest, or west southwest of you: and the
Coluerhooke lies north northeast from you, there is the best Rode in four or
five Fathom water, fair white sand, and by Coluerhook is likewise fair grou^d
to anchor on.

Item, when the Work lies south east and by south from you, then are the marks
in one.

Item, when as Mensen lies south from you, then are you open of the Wiser.

Item when the Cape of Rotten lies southeast and by East from you, then you
shall see them also in one.

Item, when the Tower or steeple of Bor^um doth lye south from you, then are
you open against the easter Emes.

Item, when you have Juster tower northeast from you, then are you within the
river of Juster.

Item, whem the Beacons of Shermerinkocke lye to the east southeast of you,
then you shall see them in one.

Item, from Rose borkin to that Beacon in the Meme: th^ course is southeast and
by east, go by the Southland in seven or eight fathom.

Item, from the Beacon on the (Meme) to the Buy on the east side of the course
is east and by north.

Item from the Buy on the east side, the course is East and by north. And hold
the North shore till you come to the Store Toee.

Item when as you come from vow, and will sail into the Elue, then keep the
south shore in fourteen fathom, and in Elue, you shall have fifteen fathom, and
is hard ground.

The course to go into the Elue.


Item when you go with the Elue, you must brin^ the Cape and the new Work in
one, which will bring you with the Buy, and the shore Buy lies on the South
shore. Then from the shore Buy, to the Buy the Newgate, the course is East and
by North: reckon always your streams, for the floods sets commonly East and by
south inwards. Then run towards the North shore in six or five fathom, and so
shall the Newgate come in with the first Buy or Tun, and when you have the Work
south at the first Buy, there shall you have it four fatha^ or the caebouts:
keep that Buy on the steereboord and go with the other Buy east (in) and
something to the Northwards from that other Buy, the Work lies southwest, and
in five or six Fathom water: then forwards to the third Buy or Tun: go East
southeast, somewhat southerly (in) And the Work lies from the third Buy
Southwest and by south, there is deeper water seven or eight Fathom taste by
the Buy, then bear on to the fourth Buy east Southeast, and the Work lies of it
south west and by west, And that fourth Buy lies on the highest of the new
grou^ds and the new grounds are steep to, and lye dry at low water Then when
you come out of the Seas, you may go in five or six fathom wat^r by the
foresaid second Buy, hence away to the Rose beacon without any danger, and keep
by the southland. Then keep your course from the fourth tun to the first,
southeast, and the first tun or Buy lies at the end of the new grounds: and
when you have brought the mill within the Land, and Cruise Kirk in one, then
are you past the new grounds. The Work and the first Buy or Tun, lye the one
from the other west southwest something more southerly.

Item, when any ship comes from by west and will go into the Elue, and hath a
southerly wind, or a west southwest wind: let him bear aloft by the south shore
in twelve Fathom, so long as he keeps the south shore, for when hee comes right
against the Elue, hee must then keep the south shore in seven or eight Fathom,
going so along the south shore till you have brought the Work south from you,
or niether abouts: and then go more northerly till you come to the Buy of the
new gate or entry in. And from the fifth Buy, go southeast and by south till
you come to the sixth Buy, and when you shall see a mil in a certain black
heath with a house: then hale in towards the land, and when you have brought
the mill to the eastwards of that house, then are you within the Rose Buy, then
go east and by south to the Rose Beacon, and when you are against the Rose
Beacon, then shall you see a little Church with a small sharpe Steeple within
the land: when you have brought ye Church right over a long house a Cable
length to the Eastwards of Rotsebetell, then shall you bee hard by the Rose
Beacon. Then go Southeast and by east up toward the Moen, and keep the south
shore in seven, eight, or nine fathom, so long, till there come to the westward
of you a sharpe Steeple, brought in one with two other steeples, that stand in
one Churchyard within the land, which is called Oldenbrook, and when one of the
steeples is come so far by the east, then you shall see a couple of trees, when
you have brought the steeples into these two trees, then are you past the
sholdes of Romerder, and then go east with Bunsutell and keep rather along the
north shore at five or six Fathom, but take heed of the souther shore for fear
of Pelgheremsand, for you shall sail along by it.

Item, if the weather so serve that you may then keep by the north shore still
till you come at Billingborch, and when you are come to Billingborch, yet keep
you on the north shore still in seven or eight Fathom, and hale so in till you
come so far as Rugeroort, then you shall come to the Easter shore, then you
must hale up something more Southerly to Staderland.

Item there is the south Elue which now lately in Anno 1571. is bowed.

Item, from the Schore Buy, to the next Buy, your course is east and by South.

Item, from the second Buy to the third: the course lies east southeast, and
something more to the southwards.

Item, from the third Buy to the fourth, the course is east and by south.

Item, from the fourth Buy or tun to the fifth, the course is east and by
north.

Item from the fifth Buy to the Buy in the Rose, the course is southeast.

Item from the Rose Buy to Rose Beacon the course is southeast, and something
southerly.

The course to sail to the Wiser.
Item, hee that comes from the westwards and will sail to the Wiser, having a
Northwest or a North Northwest wind, let him not come any nearer to Wangeroge
then six fathom, and then let him run east so long till he see the vt^ermoste
Buy: and then there lies a sand on Larbourd, which is called the mid plat, on
which is but two fathom at a full sea, and lies open before the Wiser, then
from that Buy to the other course is northeast.

Item if you should have the wind southerly, then go^ with Wengerorge, and keep
you in nine or ten Fathom, and take heed of the wester Wiser that lies at 9.
fathom inwards, then take your course over from Wangerorge Northeast till ye
come at ten or eleven Fathom, then shall ye have Menser Church bear south and
by east from you, there lies the uttermost Buy.



Item, Menser Church is a flat Church, without any steeple, and lies in
Urowkens land: from the uttermost buy to the seco^d Buy your course is east.
And whe^ you are a little from the second Buy, then lies Menser from you South
and by east, and from that Buy to the third, your course is east. And when you
are at the third Buy, then lies Menser south from you: from the third Buy to
the fourth, your course is east, but see that you always account your tide, and
then lies Menser from you south and by West. Then from the fourth Buy to the
Buy on the head, the course lies east and somewhat to the northwards, And when
ye come to the Buy, then lies Menser South southwest from you, then go
Southeast and by South to the Buy in the Fair way that lies in 10. or 11.
Fathom, and take always good heed of your stream. That Buy is laid for the
Beacon, then southeast is the course to the Buy on the Coers.

Item from the Buy upon the Coers to the Buy on ^he Steene of the Bollensill,
the course lies southeast* and to the eastwards. And when you are about the Buy
of Bollensil then set your course to the southward, with the west shore, there
are two Beacons standing.

Item, when you come ^igh unto the second Beacon th^re is a good road for a
westerly wind. And the^ have you Langhwoord go further, then set your course
southeast to the Buy or Tun upon the Ulacke. And when you are within that Buy:
then go with the west shore in three or four fathom, and so you shall come now
and then hard by ground land, until you come to Blexhemkerk* There be in the
road commonly such ship^ as are outwards bound and doe tarry for a wind.

Item when Newark lies southeast and by south of you, then have you both the
Capes in one.



Item, when you have Menser Church south from you, then are you open before the
Wiser.

Item, when the steeples of Borkum bear south from you then are you open thwart
of the easter emes.

Item, when the steeples bear nu northeast of you, then you are within both ye
Juster Ravens, in the wester emes.

Item, when the head lands of Rotum doe lie southeast and by east from you,
then are they in one.

Item, when the headlands lye south southeast from you, then they are both in
one.

The going into the Jade.
Item, if you will go into the Jade, when you are past the ^ed sand, bear in
southwards, even as far as you may, and you shall leave Menser Church on
steereboord side: and if you will sail to the Wood, then leave the church on
Larbooad side.



Item, you shall know Wangeroge by that there stands a little Church upon it,
and the steeple stands at the west end.

Item Sprigeroge is to bee known by that it is plain^ Sandhilles, and then you
shall know Langeroge, for that it appears in two Sandhilles.

Item, you shall know Balterom by that the west end is high Sandhilles, and the
east end lowe Sandheaps.



Item, you shall know Just two ways, there stands a Church over it, and the
Steeple stands at the east end of the Church, and the mill that was in Just is
blown down and is clean gone, so that there stands nothing where the Mill was.



Item, you shall know Burkum, by that it rises in three parts, and about the
midst of the land stands a church with a flat steeple and stands at the east
end of the church,

Item, you shall understand, that the Easter Emes goes in betwixt Just and
Burkum.

Item, to know Burkum well, when you shall fall with it coming from by west, it
seems to look upon as it were three Lands: for betwixt every one of the hills
of it which seems Lands: is a Valley or slack of plain sand without any hills,
and on that which seems the middlemoste Island, stands a church with a great
sharpe steeple, and stands at the west end of the church.

Item from the northwest corner of Burckum, doth lye a riff of sand, and lies
west in the Sea, at least a league and a half, and you may sail along by the
same into the easter emes, and go in east by south.

Item, the easter emes lies in east southeast, and when you have Burckum
Steeple south of you, then keep by the shore, in four Fathoms and a half, and
edge over, and fetch sounding of Juster riff, and you shall by and by have deep
water, and then keep in by him.

Item when you have brought Juster steeple Northeast of you, then are you past
both the Riffs of Juster, and then you are within the Easter emes.

Item, there is a new Channel, that is when ye have broken in the wester Emes,
which lies a little to the westwards of the old Channel, and is as deep at a
low water, as the old deep is at a full sea or high water.

Item, when any man will seek to enter in at the wester-Emes, let him bring the
bush south and by east of him, and the west end of Rotum southeast, and bring
both the two great Capes in one, and then you shall find the uttermost Buy, and
that lies in five fathom, then go from the uttermost Buy to the second Buy,
East and by north, and that lies at four Fathom, then from the second Buy to
the third Buy, likewise east and by north and that lies in six fath. And then
is the longest Cape and the ^ast Cape upon the old deep to bee kept both in
one, and so you shall have ever the deeper water. Then from the third Buy to
the farthest Buy, go east southeast, and then edge something over towards
Burckum riff, towards the north shore, least ye fall to the eastwards of
Hakenballge, which goes in by east Rotum. Also, when any man coming from by E.
with an east^rly wind, would go in at the old deep, let him bring the longest
Cape, and the least Cape as they stand in one, against the old deep, and run so
in, and there you shall find the third Buy, and the old gate or entry at a low
water hath but two fathoms ^ being an easterly wind.

Item, Bosch is on the west end full of high Sandhilles, and there is no
habitation upon it.

Item ye shall know Shirmerkerog by the lowe Sandhilles* and at the West end of
it stands a high round sandhill, and there stands two Capes upon it for to sail
into Scholbalch, and you shall bring that East Southeast from you, and then you
shall have both Capes in one, and then run right towards him till you find the
first Buy. And there lies two Buys in one gate or entry, and then when you come
to the second Buy, go east northeast, and east and by north, and you may sail
by either of these Walls, and when you come at the third Buy, then go south and
by west or south southwest, and you shall have no less at a low water then
three Fathom. Now when you come out of the sea and fall with Borne riff, then
edge towards the Wall at six Fathom, and at five fathom and a half. And do even
as hear before written, whe^ you will sail into ye Scholbalch.



Item, to know Schirmonkerogh: those are lowe sandhilles: and at the west end
stands a hill which is something higher: as for the Church, you cannot see it
till you come hard by the Land: and Schirmonkerogh is two leagues and a half in
length.



Item, upon Ameland there stands a high great Church with a flat steeple
towards the west end of the Island: and is covered with blew states, and there
is a stone house standing by east of the Church: and it seems to look upon, as
though it were an old ruinous farm house: and there lies thre^ high sand hills
aboue the midst of the land, and Ameland is four leagues in length.

Item, between schirmonkerogh and Ameland, goes in Scholbalch, and hath two
gates or entries, one goes in by Ameland, and the other by Schirmonk^ro^h.



Item, upon the Scaling are five steeples, one standing at the ^ast ^nde is
sharpe, and about the middle of the land are three steeples: two flat ones, and
the highest of all is sharp, and that which stands on the west end is a high
flat steeple: and is called S. Brandatius Church: and the Island is three
leagues in length.

Item, a southeast or northwest Moon makes a hie water in Raster deep.

Item, Huis^winen and the Maze: are distant 24. leagues

Item, Petten be high ragged sand hills.

Item, Kettle down is a white forked sand hill.

Item, the Coast of Holland lies along south southwest and somewhat to the
westwards, and north, northeast somewhat to the Northwards.

Item Marsedeepe and the Hosden lie one from the ^ther southwest and by south
somewhat westerly: and Northeast and by north somewhat easterly: and are
distant three and fifty leagues.

Item, an East or west Moon makes hie water in Marsedeepe.



Item the Maze and the UUellings are distant 3. kennings

Item, the Maze, and the Marsdeep, are distant four and twenty leagues.



Item, the Maze lies up East Southeast, and somewhat Southerly.

Item, the East Uorn^olt goes in by Fwerboden* and then by the Maine land: a
West south southwest Moon makes a full sea: also before the Maze mouth, and
within the Maze, a south south west Moon makes a full sea.

Item, before the Flee: you must take heed to the tide, for the fore flood doth
set thwart over the shallow grounds to the Eastwards, and the first of the ebb
sets likewise to the westwards.



Item the Flee is known by the high white sand hills, and there stands a small
steeple in the Church.

Item, the Flee and the Riff, are distant the one from the other 11. gaeat
kennings, and Uliland is four leagues in length*

Item, there is an Island that lies between the Flee and the Tassel that is
called Yereland, and there stands a little house upon it: see that you take
heed to your tides always before the Tassel, for the fore flood, and latter end
of the Ebb sets over to the Northwards, and the last of the flood and first of
the ebb sets to the southwards.

Item, Tassel is two leagues ^ in length.

Item, from Marsedeepe to the Swoon is nine kennings

Item, from Marsedeepe to the Ulie, is 8. leagues.

Item, whosoeue^ will sail out of Ulie to Shotland, the course is north
Northwest, and somewhat weste^lye, and so sail with a fore wind, it is three
days and a half sailing, and is 152. leagues.



Item, for to know Holland, Egmont is a flat steeple, and stands upon the sea
side, and within Egmont are two steeples standing together in one Churchyard.

Item, Fairehill and Shotland, lye by North Northwest and south southeast 150.
leagues.

Item Shotland and Boffamnes lye North and to the eastwards and south, and to
the westwards, and are distant 46. leagues.

Item, Shotland and Orteny, lie southwest and Northeast ^0. leagues, and when
you are about midway between them, you may see them both at once in a clear
day.

Item, Ortenye and Boffamus, lye south southeast and north northwest 26.
leagues.

Item, the southwest end of Shotland, and Fayre-hill lye North Northeast and
south southwest, two kennings distant.

Item Fayrehill and Farie, lye Northwest and by west, and south east and by
east, a great day and night sailing.

Item, Shotland and Barghen lye near east, and west 60. leagues distant.

Item, Shotland and Farie lye west northwest, and East south east a day and a
night sailing.

Item, Shotland and the Osterhooke of Island, lye North West and by West, and
southeast and by east, three days sailing.

Item, Farie and the Osterhooke of Island, lye northwest and southeast two days
sailing.

Item, from the Osterhooke of Island to the Bear fort, the course is south
south west, and North Northeast twenty leagues.

Item, from the Bearefort to the Sedan, is 16. Leagues, the course is West
southwest, and East Northeast is the course to Mydall, from Sedan is all lowe
plain land, and within high.

Item, from Mid^ll to Webnie the course is West, and Webnie lies three mile
from the land: and between Webnie and Midall is 6. leagues.

Item, from Webnie to Robins, the course is west, north west: and east
southeast, sixteen leagues: Robins is a little black point: between UUebnie and
Robins is four Havens. And likewise there lies of Robins west southw. three
Lands: whereof twain are two leagues and a half a piece, and the third is five
leagues long.

Item, from Robins to the Snens iockle, the course is northwest and by north,
and south east and by south, and are distant sixteen leagues. A^d between them
are many Havens, as Dorse Haven and Busande^, Cabelwick, Morwicke, Walstruse,
Strent, Hamfort, Hullin, an and Island called Widow half a mile from the land,
an other also called UUalfort.

Item, from Snens Iockle to the Bederstand, the course is south and north, and
are distant sixteen leagues. And by the Iockelles lye three Havens called
Bodem, and then Stapen and the Riff, and by Boston Riff doth lye three Havens,
Kurmwork, and Grindfort, and an Island called Sletten.

Item, from the Berderstant to the Schaghen, is 7. leag. and doe lie North and
by East, and south and by west, and between them lye four Rivers, and called in
that tongue Fords, The first is Paters fort, and then Telkfort, Admerfort, and
in Admerfort are three Havens.

Item, from the Schaghen to Disefort, is 8. long leagues and they lie one from
an other North Northeast, and south southwest: and between them are two Fords,
Orenderfoord, and the Sugheford.

Item, Disefort, and Schalwicke lye Northeast and by North, and southwest and
by south, and are distant four leagues: in D^sefort lye three havens,
schutelfort, and Alfort, and the Island Edoc.

The fords in Island, that is the rivers or creeks going up into the Land.
FIrst Swidens fort, Hoofed fort, Scored fort, Maize fort, the Disefort,
Gruniwick, Nerd fort, the Iocklefort, Ribbon fort, Hesterbeche: and in that
Haven lie Whale fish bones.

Item, from Schaelwick to the Haddenstrant, the course is north northeast, and
south southwest, and are distant 11, leagues. Here lies three mountains and yet
is whole land.

Item from the Haddenstrant to the Schagen Fort, is 16 leagues and lie North
Northeast, and south southwest: between these lye many Fords or Creeks going up
into the land. And first the Singrins Ford going into the landwards, Greens
ford, and then the Bitter, and the Putiford, the Nide ford, and Wydaell, and
Wasedaell, the long Dear.

Item, from Schargenfort to the Widalen, the course is East southeast, and West
Southwest, and are distant five leagues.

Staghenfort is a Haven, and is called Lapsand.
Item from the Widalen to the Raven hook is twenty Leagues, and lies east^
northeast, and west southwest, between these twain lies three Havens, the first
Sigelfort, and then Dackfort, then Huiswicke. And likewise three Fords or
Rivers, the first Ydlefort, and then Oneselfort, and then Lerefort, all which
are Rivers or Creeks going up into the Land.

Item from the Romehooke to Grinsie, is eight leagues, and lies east and west.

Item, Grinsie is an Island, and lies from Huiswicke, 8. leagues south
southeast, and north northwest.

Item Grinsie and Denfort lye south southwest southerly, northeast northerly.

Item, Grinsie and Sighelfort lye southwest southerly, and northeast northerly.
And under Grinsie you may anchor for a northeast wind in 17 fathom.

Item, from the Roemhooke to the Langnesse, the course is East southeast, and
west northwest, and are distant sixteen Leagues: between these twain lies a
sound and a River, the sound is called Rooter sound, and the river is called
Sescelfoert and lies at the westwards of the Langnesse: and Ynwicke and
Roodhauen lies eight leagues from Langnesse, and they lie in a manner east and
west.

Item from Langnesse to Osterhooke, the course is south southeast, and North
Northwest: and are distant four and twenty leagues, and between them lies a
Haven called Worneforte, and to the Eastwards of the Langnesse there lies a
great mountain.



Item, if ye will go in at Uergate, bring the steeple of Middelbrough and E.
Capplen in one, or to the southeast southerly and run directly so till you find
Shald water at three Fathom, and go ye so forth over the Shald: then against
Meiland, you shall come into nine or ten Fathom, then keep on so until ye come
where the Mermaid is set up at Teruere, and till you have brought those towers
or steeples which are called Ualentines towers in one: then shall you be over
against the easter Towers, and keep those towers of Teruerre in one, and so run
even hard to by them: and always account of your tides: for a south or north
Moon there makes a full Sea. Now to know Warkeren by the land, West Capplen is
a gross or a flat Steeple, and to the Eastwards of West Capplen* stands East
Caplen, and that is a sharpe Steeple, and to the North and by East of East
Capplen stands Dombrough, and is likewise a sharp Steeple,



The Order to be observed in coming out at the Wellings.
ITem to come out of ye wellings, you must leave one third part of the way on
the Larboordside, so long as you have the church by north the steeple of the
abbey of Middleborough, or to your sight, until they be within half a fath. one
of another, then you shall have Eastmunster, as far fro^ the Steeple of the
abbey as yt Could Kirk sta^d by N. it, and when the steeple of the abbey stands
so in the midst of those two Churches, then you shall have to the Northwards of
Could Kirk another steeple, which is called Westmunster: and that stands to
fight more then a ships length to the northwards of Could Kirk, and when as the
Steeple of the Abbey is brought in the midst betwixt both the two before named
Churches: then you must run directly with them, keeping the steeple so until
you have brought Arde^brough a great ships length without Heisant, and then you
must keep Flanders side, for fear of the Pools of the Willing, and that you may
be sure of the other marks. Then you shall see Weindwine with a plain, and the
valley by it that seems to bee two ships length, and then you shall see the
small steeples which are called Weindwine, open against the middle of the
valley, and then the corner of the Steeple is the mark of the depth of the
water for the nearer to the Poles, the deeper water like as is the Heilegen
before writte^: and when you see the Heilegen as it were two ships length a
sunder: there you may bring saint Lamberth by North the sandhilles. Or when you
are clear past them, you may keep the^ half a fathom a sunder in sight, and
hale so outwards a good while: and to come in at the Wellings from without,
then keep saint Lamberth as is aforesaid, till you have brought the Heilegen in
one, then you must bring Saint Lamberth three or four fathom open to the
Northwards, and after govern your self by the marks of the steeples of the
abbey, as is before written. And if it be such weather that you can not see the
steeples of the Abbey, then bear in Northeast upon a flood, until you have
brought Arenburch and saint Lamberth in one, and then hale in directly east
northeast.

Item, before Wellings: a southw. or a northeast Moon makes a full sea, and at
Walkherne, a south and a North Moon.



Item, first you shall understand that the Steeple of saint Katherins is a
sharpe steeple, and is the Steeple that stands on the west side on the Sea
Coast next to the Sluice. And from Saint Katherins up within the Land stands
another sharpe Steeple, and that is Knock. And to the westward from Saint
Katherins by the sea side stands Heyes and hath a sharpe Steeple, and is
something greater then Saint Katherins, and after that by the Sea side stands
Lisweighen, whose Church hath a great flat Steeple. And from Lisweighen up into
the land wards stands an abbey, which is called Terdoes, and that is a Church
with a little sharpe Steeple in the middle. And from Lisweighen Westwards,
stands Blankenburch upon the Sea side, and that is a Church with a flat
steeple, but it is much less then the steeple at Lisweighen, and between
Lisweighen and Blankenburch up into the landwards stands Wot Kirk, and that
hath a sharpe steeple, and stands nigh unto Blankenburch, then by Lisweighen to
the Westward of Blanckenburch, there stands Weindwine, and that is a sharpe
steeple.

Item, when the steeple of Lisweighen, and that of the Abbey of Terdoes are
brought in one, then are you right against the utter sand that lies thwart of
Mailand, and then are you within the English Pole, and if you have six Fathom
of Mailland side, then lies the Pole on the Larbooad side of you, then keep
over Mailland in six or seven Fathom, but no deeper, and run in so long, till
you have brought the Steeple and saint Katherins, and the steeple of Knock in
one, those are called the Heileghen, and then are you clean past the English
Pole, and then bea^e inwards so long, till Saint Katherins Steeple comes in one
with a high black hill, and then you are against the French Pole.

And when the Steeple is hidden with the land that lies by North of the Sluis:
then are you past the French Pole.

The marks and order to be kept when ye will sail in at Botkill.
ITem when as you will sail in at the Botkill, having recovered the shore, you
shall bring the Steeple of Middleborough southeast of you or thereabouts. And
go so in till you have west Capplen east southeast from you, and then you shall
see the Church of west Capplen come in a glaid of the sandbanks, then keep the
Church so of you, so long till Saint Actens comes past east Capplen, and then
are you past the Shalds. Then run inwards towards the shore to Flushing.

How you shall sail in at the Doerloe.
ITem, when you pretend by Gods grace to sail in at the Doerloe, bring the high
steeple of Middelborough to the northwards of the flat Steeple, and also a
little from thence the two south towers almost together, the innermost as it
were within the length of a Capstein bar from the uttermost, and run so into
Flushing east and by south, or thereabouts is the course. And the Southberghen
are two sharp steeples standing betwixt Middleborough and Flushing.

Item, East Capplen is a sharpe steeple: west Capplen and Saint Actens are
likewise sharpe steeples, That stands from it to the Eastwards, and is much
higher then East Capplen.

Selland.
ITem, the land on Selland side lies along southwest and northeast, and a south
southwest Moon makes a full Sea.

The Clocken deep by Flanders side.
ITem, when as you will go in at the Clocken deep, you must bring west Capplen
in one with Saint Katherins church by Clocken, and so go you in at the best
deep, and ^aint Katherins steeple is the next steeple to the Sluis by the water
side, and those other steeples stands up into the landwards, and after that
Hays, and then Blancken-Church that hath a flat steeple: after that, there
stand three steeples to the westwards.

The Coast of Flaunders.
ITem, on Flaunders side, the Coast lies along East Northeast, and West
southwest, and a south or north Moon makes a full sea at the shore. And without
the sholds a southwest or northeast Moon: and along all the coast of Flaunders
in the uttermost Channel, it is not in an^ place aboue four and twenty fathom
deep.

The Swine.
ITem, if you will go in at the Swine to come in, the wind being contrary: then
take the latter end of the flood, and the first of the ebb. And when you will
sail in at Heyes deep, you must bring the four Beacons of Heyes which stands by
the Mill in one, over Core at Heyes: and then shall you go in at the best deep,
and so you shall go far enough from the utter sand: and so you may bear on to
the Weelings east northeast. And you shall understand, that Anchewisen, Buisen
and the Swine, doe keep all one just time of flowing and ebbing.

Item when as Donkerke lies due south southeast from you, and that you can then
but see it upon the hatches, then is there a flat of two fathom deep at a lowe
water.

The order and course of the streams and tides along the Coasts of Flaunders,
Normandy, and of Britain to the Seames.
ITem, first you shall vndersta^d, that along all the coast of Flanders and of
Sealand, the flood runs to the eastwards, and the last quarter of the flood, ye
streams sets to the seawards, and the last quarter of the ebb to the landwards.
There are sand banks about which, as well at sometimes of the flood, as at
sometimes of the ebb, there goes no stream at all.

If you come to an anchor by east of the Nese in ten Fathom you shall bee well
defended for a west southwest wind.

Item thwart of the head, the flood sets in Northeast and by north, and the ebb
sets out southwest and by south.

Whosoever will come to an ancker at lands end of England by Dover, let him
cast ancker and ride at five or 6 fathom, and he shall ride well for a south
wind.

He that will come to Ancker by the Gulles, let him ride at five fa^ham, and
saint Marget's Church shall bear south sou^heast to him.

And whosoever will come to ancker within saint Marget's, let him ride at six,
seven or ^ight fathom.

Note, that from Ostend to Saint Katherins: the Flood sets east northeast and
the ebb west southwest.

Between Grauelin and Dunkirk: the flood runs Northeast and by North, and the
ebb sets southwest and by south.

From Woltersland to Grovelling: the ^loud sets North northeast: and the ebb
west southwest.

From the Ness to Woltersland: the flood sets North and by east land the ebb
sets south and by west.

From Bullen to Blackness, the flood sets to the northwa^ds, and the ebb to the
southwards.

From Staples, to Bullen, the flood sets north northeast and the ebb southwest.

From Cane to Staples the flood sets northeast and by north, and the ebb
southwest and by south.

From Deep to Cane, the flood runs northeast and by north: and the ebb
southwest and by south.

From Fecam to Deep in the fair way, the flood sets Northeast and by east, and
the ebb southwest and by west.

From Bereflecte to Fecam, four or five miles of the land in the fair way, the
flood runs eas^ northeast, and the ebb sets west south west.

From Berefleete to Sainehead: the flood runs ea^ south east: and the ^bbe west
northwest in the fair way: and you may not come any nearer then 12. fathom.

Item from Berefleete into the Bay of Hags: the flood sets southeast and the
ebb west Northwest.

Item, from the Cape of the Hag, to the Island called Alderny: the flood sets
northeast, and the ebb southwest: and in the race of Blanchey it is so
likewise.

Item, from the Caskets to Berefleete, the flood sets to the eastwards, and the
ebb westward.

And between Brittany Bay and the Caskets, the flood sets northeast and by
north, and the ebb southwest and by south.

Item from Garnesay to the Caskets, the first quarter flood runs East
southeast, and then after northeast and the ebb south west.

It^m at ^ well within as without, the flou^ runs ^ast south wes^ and the ebb
west northwest.

Item fr^m th^ ^ ufe to A^wracke along the shore, the flood sets east and by
south, and the ebb West and by no^th.

Item from the Fourne to Saint Powles de Lyons, or the Isle of Bas^ th^ flood
runs east and by north, and the ebb west and by south.

Item, from Saint Matthews to the Fourne, the flood runes north and by east,
and the ebb south and by east.

Item from the race of Fontenie to saint Matthews, the flood sets North and by
East, and the ebb South and by west.

Item nigh unto Ushant North northeast of is a place which is two and fifty
fathom deep: and no ship can ^ide there, for the tide goes round about as a
which pool^.

Item from the Sean^es in the broad s^nd ^etweene that and Ushant, the ^oud
runs east northeast, and the ebb west southwest.

Item, from Woltersland to Grovelling, the coast along lies northeast and by
east.

Item, Woltersland lies off of the before wr^tten Rocks northeast, and a little
to the Eastwards, and are distant 29. leagues.

Item, three Rocks which lie without the Cape of Cause, lye north northeast
from Swine head, and are distant five leagues.

Item, Sainhead lies from Berefleete east and by south and is distant 21.
leagues.

Item, Berefleete lies from the Caskets: east and by south, and are distant 16
leaques.

Item, the Caskets lies from the Fourn^ northeast, and a little to the
Eastwards, and are distant three and forty leagues.

Item, the Caskets lies from Saint Powle de Lyons northeast, and are distant
33. leagues.

Item, Garnsay lies from Saint Powles Northeast, and a little to the eastwards
and are distan^ ^5 leagues.

Item, set Isles lies from saint Powles east northeast, and are distant 12.
leagues.

Item Saint Powles lies from Ushant East and by north, and are distant 26.
leagues.

Item, the race of Fontenie and the wester Penmarke, northwest and southeast
and are distant 9. leagues.

Item the course from Bellille to Penmark is west north west, and so you shall
go clear without the Pens, and it is from the wester Penmarke, to the southeast
end of Bellille 24. leagues.

Item Bellille lies from Use northwest, and it is from the northwest end of
Use, to the southeast end of Bellille 16. leagues.

Item the course from the tail of Aise to Use, is West northwest, and it is
from the tail of Aise to the northwest end of Use 13. leagues.

Item, whosoever will anchor by the Caskets or Hag: let him go with the land,
within three or four cable length o^ the shore, for fear of the bank which lies
out from the land in four or five fathom, till you come at the Caskets, and
then when ye^ come before the Village, then let fall your anchor at five or six
fathom: and the bark doe lie from Seine head southwest.

Item if you will anchor before Deep, bring the Church and the gibbet in one,
and then let your anchor fall at 10. fathom at a full Sea, and at a lowe water
at 7. fathom.

Item, if you will anchor in the Fossis by Fecam: you shall bring the m^l and
the fire Beacon in one, and keeping them foe g^e ^ west to the single, and
Anchor between the head of the Hordrelles and Reihem. And a ship that draws a
fathom an^ ^ water, m^st have half flood or better: and you^ ^ the Fo^fis, for
there you have ^ut a fathom and a half at a low water.

Item, who^oeuer will anchor under the Ness: hee must let fall his anchor
before Coudey at ten or twelve fathom, and if you go in any sarthar, you shall
have foul ground.



Now you must note when as you have the west end of the Caskets south from you,
being four Leagues or there about^ off there you shall have it eight and thirty
or nine and thirty fathom deep, reddish and s^elly ground, and likewise many
white stones: and there between Caskets and Portland, you shall have 40 fathom
deep.

Item, he that will go to Garnsay, must sail so the cape of Rokeine that is the
westermost part o^ the Island, and let him sail to the southwards of that Cape
three or four Cable length. And then he shall go in along that souther side
until ye see the Castle, and when ye have the Castle thwart of you, then anchor
at five or six fathom.

Item, he that will anchor before Sherbrocke, let him cast anchor before the
Castle at six fathom, and he shall have good road for a west northwest wind.

It^m, without the west end of the foreland of Berefleet, lye rocks which are
dry at a lowe water, and lye a leagu^ from the shore, right before the great
sandy Bay.

Item, he that will anchor before the Hook, let him keep off a good way from
the Headland, and then ye shall see two Churches westwards off from him, the
one upon the high land, and the other Church below. And when you hau^ brought
those two Churches in one, then come to an anchor at a lowe water at six
fathom, and at a full sea, at nine or ten fathom.

Item, S. Powles and Ushant, are dist^t 13. league^, and lye the one from the
other West southwest, and East northeast.



Item, he that will sail to the Isle of Base before Saint Poule de Lions, ye
shall see to the southwards a great rock and you may hale in fast by the rock:
and when ye are right against the rock, you may come to anchor at three fathom
at a lowe water, and at a full sea at seven or eight fathom. And from the East
corner of the Island, there lies a great rock, which at half flood is under
water.

Item, whosoever will sail into Aberwracke, he must leave the great rock to the
eastward of him, and run in South southeast, and when you come in by an Island,
and the rock is to seawards of you, then you shall keep along by the shore of
the East side. And when you have sailed a while, then you shall see a rock that
lies under water, and the sea breaks on it continually, and lies in the midst
of the entry: and you may sail on which side you will of it. And when you are a
good way past the Rock, then you may anchor at four or five fathom.

Item, north northwest from Aberwracke a league into the sea lies a bank, which
hath but six fathom on it at a lowe water.

Item when you lie off and about the Mollens, then must you bring the Abbay of
S. Matthews, a little without the corner of Conket, but you may not bring it
far without.

Item, when you have Hieman hill in the northwest end of the foresaid little
Island, then are you right against the souther Mollen, then keep along the east
shore, till you come to Blanckhauen.

Item the Mollens are six little Lands, which lye in a manner southeast from
Ushant.

Item hee that will sail from Blank haven Northwards, let him r^nne North
Northwest: and let him take heed of the North corner of the Blank haven, for
fear of a great Rock that lies before it, and then northwest and by west of it
lies a rock under water, which lies not aboue three fathom and a half deep at a
low water, and is a very sharpe rock.

Item, whosoever will come to anchor in Blancke-hauen, let him let fall his
^nker against the middlemoste Bay, at fifteen or sixteen fathom.

Item a little by south of Conket, it is not aboue four fathom and a ^lfe, deep
at a lowe water in a spring tide.

Item whosoever will sail by west the Vintner, he must keep the corner of Blank
haven over the Blanken Mongie. And sailing so, you shall find four fathom deep
at a lowe water and a spring tide. And when as you cannot see Conket from the
North part: then are you by North the Vintner. And if you can see in at the
haven of Conket, then are you by south the Vintner.

Item hee that will anchor before S. Matthews corner in the best road: let him
cast anchor at sixteen or seventeen fathom, and look that the said corner lye
northwest and by by north from you.

^tem, Saint Matthews point and the race of Fontenie, lie the one from an other
north and by west and south and by east and are distant 5. leagues.

I^em, the corne^ of Saint Ma^hewes and the point of Cro^don lye the one from
the other east south east and west northwest, and are distant 3 leagues.

Item, the Collier lies of Saint Matthews po^nt south sou^heast, and something
to the Eastwards two leagues.

Item, the Hen with her Ch^ckens lies by the West corner of Croidon, or Clears
down, and are covered at a high water.

Item, the Rock called the Nome i^ ^ the mouth or entry of Breast, and to the
Southward of tha^ about a quarter of a leagu^ lies a Rock which is not ^ us at
a s^ring ^ide.

Item the Falconers lie without Cr^on ^ little to the southward and it is a
great high rock: and ^ou may sail within it if ye go from Croidon to the r^ce
of Fo^tenie.

Item west southwest from the Collier h^ to a league off, lies a rock no deeper
then so, ^ a ^.

Item, when you are forced to lye off and ^, nigh about the Collier and the
weathe^ i^ such ^ ^horite the Collier then keep the corne^ of the ^ without the
corner which lies from the northwe^ ^nd of Sa^nt Matthews Abbey: and then you
cannot (in so doing ^).

Item, the thwart m^nes of ^ the Borborow and when you have ^ in one, then are
you against the O^h^rland and when you can see the Colliers break aboue the
water, then you man if you will sail hard by it.



Item when you are of Ushiant, North and by West, so far as you can well see
the same from the Deck, then doth the East corner appear the highest part of
the Island, and the corner is to the eastwards very steep down, and then the
land is plain almost to the west point, and the west point something steeping.

Item, when you are northwest and by North of Ushant then may you see through
the point which is to the southwards of the maine Island, and when you are off
o^ Ushant Northwest and by West, then is that point shut in on the shore.



Item, wh^ Ushant bears north Northwest from you, then doth it app^r^ like as
it is here aboue demonstrated.

Item, when you are off o^ Ushant northwest and by west, or west Northwest,
then lies there a great Rock of the northeast point, but you cannot well see
through betwixt the Roc^e and Ushant from thence. And along the northwest for
of Ushant, it is all full of great flat Rocks, and lye all under wate^: and by
the West end a little from the shore, ^en a sm^l rock as it were two little
hillocks.

Item when ^ou are West and by North f^om Ushant, then their ^ a^other rock to
appear o^t at the north ^nd but you cannot ^ see through betwixt the rock and
Ushan^.

Item, when you are one West of Ushant, then may you see two g^eat rocks lying
without the northwest co^ner of it: and you may also see through betwixt the
corner and the ro^k ^ and ^he lands seems then to be all plain aloft, seeming
eue^ ^ place almost like high.

Item, when you are south and by west from Ushant, so far off as you may well
see it f^om the Hatches a^ Hull of the ship, if ye then look out of the top,
you shall see the West northwest end all ragged with many rocks, and at the
east southeast end lies a round rock, and you may easily see betwixt the Rock
and Ushant. And then a little from that east southeast of you, you may see the
Mollens which doe lye in two little Lands, and there lies yet other three Lands
towards the maine, but those you cannot see from hence, and they lie every one
a good way off from an other and there lies many great Rocks about that Island
that lies next to Ushant and is full of Hillocks.



Item, a Bow shoot from the point of Konket, lies the Vintner, and at a lowe
water you may see it, it is a little flat round Rock, and you may sail round
about it.

Item, the course from the Fourne to Blanch haven, is East, and from the Fourne
to Blanchsablen Bay, South southeast.

Item, when you will sail from Saint Matthews point into Breast or Croidon,
keep the southernmost Island of the Mollens open to the Southwards of Blank
Mongie, and go East Southeast in with Breast, and so you can take no hurt on
the north side, for it is broad enough.

Item the Mollins are six little Lands, and the highest of them is that next to
Ushant.

Item, on the shore at Fontnes head, a Southwest and a northeast Moon makes a
full Sea.



Item, the Seames lye off into the sea, 3. leagues west northwest.

Item, when you will anchor in the race of Fonteny, you must anchor at
fourteen, or at fifteen fathom.

Item, when any man will pass the race of Fonteny, let him set his prow to the
North northeast, and let him take good heed of the Lavender, for ye flood sets
directly towards it, and there is a sonken rock hard by. Also, hard by the
Kaiser there lies a flat rock, in the race on the easter side.

Item, if you come out of the sea with Saint Matthews point through the broad
sound, you shall see a high land up in the land eastwards, with three hills as
it were three heads, and the northernmost is the highest, and half a league to
the southwards, there lies an other high hill, and is the highest aboue the
high land.



Item, when the Sheet bears north from you or thereabouts, so as you may see it
out of the top, then it rises a^ here aboue is showed: and the ground is small
white sand, and many small Mazes in it: and it is there seven and fifty, eight
and fifty, and nine and fifty fathom deep, and you cannot from thence see the
Seames out of the top.



Item, when you are three leagues from Groy, or thereabouts, then it shows thus
as is set forth: and Groy and Bellille rises almost of one fashion, and lye the
one from the other North northwest, and South southeast, and are distant seven
leagues: and under Groy is likewise very good riding.



Item when Groy lies east north^ast fr^m you, then it shows as is here aboue
described.



Item when Groy lies north and by w^st from you, then it shows as is aboue
figured.



Item when Groy lies Northeast from you, then doth it show as is aboue
portrayed.



Item when Bellille bears north northeast from you, then it shows like as is
aboue portrayed.

Item the point of Saint Gindast and Glanons at the entering of Penodet lye the
one from the other southeast and northwest, and are distan^ four leagu^s. And
forts eschew the danger of the Sholdes in this Channel, let these marks
following be well remembered, and you cannot doe amiss.

There is lying between Glanons and the Isle of Moton a ledge of Rocks, and to
go clear of them, you must leave one third part of the way towards the Glanons,
and the other two parts towards the Isle of Moton and so you may sail without
fear.

Item, when any man will sail into Penodet, hee must borough hard by the maine
land, and the point of Glanons shall bear Southeast of him: then let him go
Northwest till he come before the haven, and there he may anchor at four
fathom.

Item, whosoever will sail out of Cantper to go through between the Isle of
Moton and the Ledge, he must sail hard by Moton, so no as a man may throw a
pound stone a shore, and then go southwest and by south, and when you are come
out with Glanons, then you may sail boldly without danger to Penmarke: they lie
the one from the other east southeast, and west northwest, and are distant 9.
leagues.



Item when you are West of Bellille, from the Northwest part of it four Leagues
from the land, then doth it show thus as i^ here portrayed.

Item, from Bellille to Use, the course is southeast and northwest and are
distant 16. leagues.

Item, when you will anchor at the east end of Bellille, bring your self a
little to the west wards of the Mill: and ancker in ten fathom, and ye shall
ride well for a northwest wind and for a southwest and by west wind, and there
is indifferent good ground, great red gravel: and when you will ride on the
Northeast side in Poldye Bay, anchor at 11. or 12. Fath. and then will the east
point cover you for a southeast wind. And for a west Northwest wind, set over
again towards the sharpe steeple, and seek no better depth then twelve or
thirteen Fathom and hee that will, may ride in eight, ten or twelve fathoms.

Item, he that will sail from the inner part of Bellille to Glanons, he must go
Northwest and by west, till hee come against the the ^oint o^ Glanons, which is
called saint Ginvast, because of Sholds that lye there between Glanons and
Groy.



Item when Use bears southwest and by south from you, about half a league off,
then doth it rise thus as aboue is showed,

Item, Use is a league and a half in length.



Item, when Use doth bear north northeast from you: then it shows thus as is
aboue figured.

Item, he that will ancker under Use, he must let fall his ancker at seven,
eight or nine Fathom, for it is no deeper there, and you may not ride there at
less then seven Fathom, in the northeast side is the best Road of Use but
beware of a Rock that lies at the easter end as you come by it, for it is very
dangerous.

Item, the course from Use to the tail of Aise, is East southeast and are
distant 14. leagues.

Item, whosoever will sail from Use to Pillar, let him not come any nearer the
maine land of Larmester, then 12 fathom.

Item Pillar and Use lye the one, from the other North and by west, and south
and by east, and are distant a great kenning, and in that course lie many
sholds.

He that will sail from Pillar towards the Bay, let him beware of the Monkins
ledge, and let him go east north east, for the Castle of Larmester stands on
the east side of the Abbey. And when you have brought those two marks in one,
then you must ^et thwart over to Pietermein. And from P^etermein you may very
well go east Southeast, till you have brought the Ca^le of Larmester and a t^ee
in one then you may anchor at 6. or 7. fathom, where you list, it is soft
g^ound

Item, he that goes without Bellille bound for the Bay, hee must go east
southeast with Pillar, and it is distant from Bellille fourteen leagues. And
then from Pillar to the Monkens, the course is east northeast: and are a league
a sunder, and from the Monkens to Piet^rmein, the course is due east, a small
league of.

The marks to go into the Bay.
ITem, when you sail into the Bay, you shall see a little church standing upon
the high land, you must keep that Church in one with the land of the Collets,
and so you shall go in at the best of the Bay. And when you have the haven of
Premdie open, then you are directly thwart of the ledge: when you are past
that, then you may keep along by the shore of Collet in four fathom, and in the
Bay, a northeast and by east Moon makes a full sea.

Hee that comes to ride under B^llille before Saint Powles, may ride at 13. or
14 fathom, and if he will ancker before Pogemeison, hee must ride at 21. or 22.
fathom.

And he that will sail in at the south Pe^trees, let him go along by the south
shore in 8. or 9. fathom, and when ^e is come as far as saint Ma^is, then shall
hee keep the four of Rochell right over the Wood which lies to the southwards
of the other poin^ of Rochell, and when the corner of the Wood bears northeast
of you, then he may set his course southwards or ^rthwards without da^ger.

Item, hee that will sail by in the north Pertrees, let him edge from the north
side, for that is the should, and the south shore is something deeper. And w^en
you are against the Blockhouse then shall you have 8.9. or 10. fathom of the
tail of Eyes, they lie southeast and northwest, then keep near to the north
shore, till you are thwart of the Wood, and the south sho^e from the Monastery
is fl^t* and w^en it is half flood you may go over with a ship th^t d^awes
twelve foot water.

Item, he that will ride thwart of the Wood, must let fall his anchor at 7. or
8. fathom, and there is soft ground.

Item, the tail of Aise lies east southeast and west northwest.

Item, the south Pertries lies from Rochell: from the road of Charlie de Bloys,
west southwest into the sea.

Item, you must have the tide to sail from Rochell to the road of saint Georges
Island: and then forth to ^orage, and your course from the road of Rochell to
saint Georges Island, is south southeast, something more southerly, and they
are distant two leagues. ^



Item, when saint Martins Island lies northeast and by north from you: it seems
to you as it is here aboue portrayed: and the land lies east southeast, and
west northwest and it is of length four leagues.

Item, when you come in by the south Petris, then take good heed to the south
shore of Oleron. for there lies out a great ledge of Rocks that breaks always:
and it lies not far of from the Island of Oleron: they are called the Dogs, and
you may boldly bear along by saint Martins Island in 6.7. or 8. fathom.

Item the Lauerden lies a great league from the point of the Boss, and in a
spring tide at ^ lowe water it is dry and uncovered. And you may very well sail
through between saint Martins Island, and the Lauerdin: for it is deep enough,
and then when you see the great tower at Rochell clean without the Boss: then
are you clear of the Lauerdin: and in the Boss there is at a low water 5 fat.

Item a southwest or a Northeast Moon makes a full Sea there.

Item, when the white flat tower in Rochell (which is called Duke Charles
tower) comes to the southwards of the point of the burned Island. then are you
right against Bangert, and then you may boldly sail into the Island of Oleron.

The grounds and depths of Britain.
ALso, hee that is south southwest from the pole head of Bordeaux and in seven
and twenty fath. hee shall see sandhills to the southwards. And he that will
sail from the pole head of Bordeaux to Rochell, and will come in at the so.
Peretrees, let him not run any nearer the Land, then thirteen or fourteen
fathom.

Item, at the ent^ng of the Peretrees, you shall have 13. or 14. fathom come no
nearer the shore then that depth.

Item, when you are west northwest from the south Peretrees, and about 5. great
leagues from the shore: you shall have four and twenty fathom, and gross red
stony sand.

Item, if you be Southwest from the pole head of Bordeaux: and have ^ and three
fathom, and will go with the Pole head, th^n go Northeast, and you shall not
sail long, but you shall have sixty three, and sixty fathom. And thereby you
shall perceive you be in the right course to the polewards. And if you have
five and twenty fathom: then you shall see the tower of Cordon: that lies east
and by south of the polehead, and the same tower lies East southeast of the
wester Swach.

He that is betwixt Bellille and Use in 74. Fathom, shall be from the land of
Poitow about twenty and three leagues: and if then he sail towards the land
thirteen leagues, hee shall find but 42 fathom.

He that is from saint Ellen southwest, and hath three and thirty fathom: hee
is about nine leagues, from the shore and when he comes to seven and twenty
fathom, he shall see the land if it be clear weather.

Item, to the westwards of Oleron: when you are two kennings from the land: you
shall have 50. fathom, And west northwest in the Sea from Olleron, about
eighteen leag. lies a ledge of Rocks which is called the Toper, and is not
aboue three fathom upon it at a lowe water.

Hoe that comes from Rochell outwards by the North Peretrees, let him keep in
15. fathom, and he shall not need to fear the Barges of Olleron, for hard by
the Barges you shall have twelve Fathom. And hee that keeps this course along
West Northwest, hee shall find without Use thirty Fathom. And between Use and
Bellille in the fair way, or Northwest course, hee shall find thirty fathom,
and in the inner channel five and twenty fathom.

Item, without Use, being within sight of the Steeple of the Church, you shall
have eight and forty fathom: and 2. kennings from Use, you shall have forty
^tham.

Item, he that is southwest from Belille, and hath seventy two fathom he is
sixteen leagues from the Island. And if he be southwest from the west end of
Bellille, and have seventy fathom, he is then twel^ le^gu^ from the land, and
if hee bee against the middle o^ the Island in sixty three fathom, he may see
the Island out of the shrouds.

Item being southwest from the west point of Bellille: and as far off as you
may in a clear weather see land upon the Hatches, you shall have about sixty
Fathom, and the ground is like Mustard seed^ br^s^ in ^ mortar.

You shall have the depth without thwart of Bellille, about five and forty
Fathom: come no nearer the land by night.

From Bellille to the Seames, come no nearer the Land by night then fifty
fathom.

He that sets forth from Bellille, and goes west and by North, and keeps on
till he come thwart of the Glanons, shall find fifty or sixty fathom, and there
lie Rocks without Glanons in the fair way, and on both sides of them is about
forty fathom.

Hee that is without Penmarke in forty five Fathom, sailing from thence
northwest, he shall double the Seames, and within the Seames he shall find five
and fifty fathom come no nearer by night for fear of the Bridge, for that Rock
lies a great way in the Sea west southwest off.

From the Seames, two leagues and more into the Sea lies a great ledge of
Rocks, and between the Seames and Ledge is 50. Fathom, and there is upon one
part of the Ledge but 7 Fathom deep, and 12. Fathom in some places.

Item, three leagues to the southwards from the race of Fontenie, you shall
find 64. fath. and the ground is something soft.

Item, betwixt the Seames, and Ushant is 56. Fathom and hard by Ushant you
shall have 45. fathom. And also far in the sea you shall likewise have the same
depth, and therefore it is perilous to trust to the depth there.

Item, seven leagues without Ushant, at the entering into the Sleue, you shall
find 70. fathom, and between Ushant and Aberwracke, in the fair way is 40.
fathom.

Item, in the course between Ushant and Silly, which lye southeast and
northwest, you shall find 70. fathom.

The Colour of the ground in sundry soundings.
IN primis, he that sounds thwart of Glanons, shall find small black sand.

And he that sounds against Penmarke, shall find soft gravel like wax.

He that sounds against Fontenie head, shall have red sand mingled with black.

He that sounds beeween Ushant and the Seames, shall find great red sand, and
some small red stones, and some black mingled withal.

And he that sounds being thwart of Ushant, shall find small white sand mingled
with white shells, and certain things like white Hackes teeth, and then he hath
Ushant northeast from him. And if he find all along small things like needles,
then Ushant bears from him southeast.

And if he cannot well judge by the grounds, let him then bear to the
northwards: and if he find deeper water then he is in the sholding of the
Seames, and open the broad sound.

And if he be between Ushant and the Seames in 70. Fathom: then you shall have
the ground small black stones with black sand. And if he find the sounding to
bee great red sand, then hee must stand to the northwards till he find white
sandy ground: with long small things like Hackes teeth, and then he shall know
thereby that he is in the entering of the Sieve.

He that sets out from Siserge: must go north northeast to go without Ushant:
and when you have 10. fathom then he is 19. or 20. leagues from Ushant: and
sailing on forwards, he shall have 70. fathom, and then hee is a 11. or 12.
leagues from Ushant: and if hee sound and find small whole shells, and little
stones like wax, then hee is thwart the Seames. And finding this ground, let
him stand northwards, and if it bee on a flood, let him take heed of Ushant.

Item, if you bee between Ushant, and the Eel of Basse, in 60. fathom, you
shall find in the sounding small stones as big as beans, and thereby you may
know that you are on Britain side.

Item, if you be about the lands end of England, or about the Lesart in 70.
fath. then you are from the land 17. or 18. leagues, and you shall find in your
sounding small black stones, mingled in great red sand.

And if you be in the same course at 60. fath. then are you 12. or 13. leagues
from the shore, and there your ground shall be great red sand and under it long
small white things.

Item, if you find the like depth towards the coast of Corenwa^l, you shall not
see the land so soon as you think, for you shall have that depth endure a long
time.

Item by the Lizard it is shore deep 25. or 30. fathom and the land hard by.

Item southwest of Silly, the ground is full of all sorts of little stones like
the parings of Cheese, and white small shells mingled withal.

Item, to the southwards of Silly, the ground is gross sand.

Item, to the southwest of Silly, the ground is red stones and fine white sand.

Item 16. ^ s^th of Silly, there is the ground likewise small ^ and white sand.

Item. in 37. and 65. fathom, the ground is shells and whitish stones with
sand.

Item, if you h^ue small black stones something long and mingle^ wi^ ^l^cke
gross sand, that shows the entering of the Sleu^.

Soundings along the Coast of Britain.
ITem if you bee on the Coast of Lyons between Ushant and Saint ^ sixty Fathom,
you are then within two leagues of the land, and take heed you come no nearer
by ^ Fathom, for you shall see base Britain and the R^cke al a right.

Item within a league of Aberwracke, you shall have 50. fathom and three leag.
from the shore is there 56. fathom.

Item if you ^ thwart of Set Isles Northeast of ten leagues, you shall ^ 52.
Fathom.

Item, if you sail southwest from the Caskets 13. or 14 leagues past Garnesay,
and from thence to Set Isles in the Drech course, is 35 and 40. fathom.

Item, if on the day you lye off and on between Aberwrack and the Fourne, come
no nearer the Rocks then 35 or 40. fathom, and take good heed in the night.

Item, if you lye off and on in the day time between the Isle of Base and
Lanterger, you may come within 25. fathom of the maine without danger:

Item, he that comes with Dragnesse West southwest from Set Isles, let him come
no nearer by night then 40. Fathom.

The course to be kept sailing from the tail of Aise.
THe course from the Killiats or tail of Aise, to Use: is west northwe^, and
fro^ the tail of ^ i^ the northwest end of Use is 14. leagues.

Item, Bel^lle and Bluet ^ ^rthwest, and it is from the Northwest and of ^
southeast end of Bellille, 16, leagues.

The course from Bellille to the ^ P^nmarke, is West Northwest: and so you
shall ^ enough off the Pens, and from the west ^ to the southeast ^nd of
Bellille: is 19. leagues.

Fontenie or the Rase, lies from the wester Penmarke: northwest, and are
distant 8. leag^.

Saint Powles de Lyons lies from Ush^nt east and by north: and are distant 16.
leagu^.

Set Isle lies from saint Powl^ ^ and i^ distant 12. leagues.

Garnesey lies from saint ^, and a little to the Eastwards, and are distant ^.

The Caskets lies from saint ^ ^theast, and are distant 28. leagues.

The Caskets lie from the ^ and a little to the eastwards, and are dista^ 45 ^.

Berefleete lies from the ^ and by south, and is distant 16. Leagues.

Seine head lies from ^ and by north, and is distant 21. leagues.

Item, the Rocks which doe li^ without the Cape of Cause lye north northeast of
^ head, about 5. leagues.

Blackness lies from the said Rocks of Cause northeast and a little to the
eastwards: and is distant 30. leagues.

From Blackness to Grovelling, the land lies along northeast and by east.

And all the Coast of Flaunders lies east northeast and west southwest.

The lying of the Headlands of the Coasts of Porting all and Spain.
IN primis the point at Farao or Cape saint Mary, lies from the Rocks of
Chipiona, which lie at the east point of the entering of the Ru^er of Swill
east and West, distant 28. leagues.

The Cape saint Uincent lies from the Cape of Saint Maries, West and a little
to the Northwards, and are distant 18. leagues.

Cape Picher lies from the Cape of saint Uincent, North and to the westw^s
distant 33. leagues.

The Cape of Rockesemper lies from Cape Picher northwest and by north and is
distant 8. leagues.

The Burlings from Rockesemper lye north northwest and are distant, 1^.
leagues.

Cape Finister lies from the Burlings due North: and are distant 68. ^.

The entering ^ lies from Burlings, north and by east 55. leagues.

The Island of ^ lye from Cape Finister southeast and by south distant 16.
leagues.

The entering ^ Moors, lies from Cape Finister southeast, and ^ 5. l^gues.

The Cape of ^ lies from Cape Finist^r due north and is distant two leagues.

Siserge lies from Cape Korean Northeast and by east, and is distant 10.
leagues.

The Cape Pri^r li^ from Siserge East northeast, and they are distant ^.
leagues.

The Haven of Ferr^e lies from Siserge due East, distant 7. leagues.

Ortingal lies from Cape Prier Northeast and by East and is distant 8. leagues.

Ortingall, U^r^ point, cape Penny, and Martinchaco in Biskaie, lies one from
an other east and west, and are a sunder 66. leagues.

The Island of Saint Cyprian lies distant from Ortingall 7. leagues.

The entering into Rebadew, lies from the Island Saint Ciprian southeast, and
they are distant 8. leagues.

The Rocks of Cappenye lye from the ^ntring of Rebadew northeast and by east,
distant 14. leagues.

Martinchaco lies from the Rocks of Cape Penny east, and is distant 43.
leagues.

The point of Pewger lies from Martinchaco east and by south: and are distant
14. leagues.

The point of Bayone lies from the H^wgar northeast and are distant five
leagues.

Arkason lies from the point of Bayone due North, and is distant 18. leagues.

The Pole head of Burdiaur lies from Arkason due N. and is distant 18. leagues.

The south Peretris by Rochell lies ^rom the Cole head of Bordeaux north
northwest, and they are ^tant 1^ leagues.

The courses to be kept in cro^ing the Sea.
IN primis, the Cape of Clear and ^, doe lye one directly from the other, south
^, and North and by West: and are distant the one from the other 155 Leagues.

The Tower of Waterfoord lies from the Groin, next hand due North, and are
distant 156. leagues.

The old head of Rinfal and the ^ south and to the eastwards, and north and to
the We^wards, and distant 155. leagues.

Silly lies from Cisarge North and by east, and is distant 133. leagues, and
keeping that course, you shall go four leagues to the eastwards of Silly.

Ushant lies from Cisarge north northea^, and are distant 108. leagues.

The Cape of Ortingall and the Lizard lye the one from the other north and by
east, and south and by west, and are distant 130, leagues.

The Seames and the Haven of Rebadewe doe lie one from an other north and by
east, and south and by west, and are distant 94. leagues.

Item, Pem^ark^ lies from Uiueris north northeast, and are distant 90. leagues.

Mouse hole in Cornwall lies from Cape Prior, North and by east, and are
distant 136. leagues.

Fontenie li^ from Ortingal north northeast, and is distant 90, leagues.

Groy lies from Uiueris northeast and by north distant 97. leagues.

Bellille lies from Ortingall Northeast and is distant 90. Leagues, and keeping
your course so, you shall fall seven leagues by east ^.

And you mu^t ^, that seven leagues are here reckonev for a kenning.

Item Set Isle is three kennings to the Eastwards of the Fourne, and ther^ lies
by them a great soncken rock in the sea, and when ^ are North and by west from
the land so far an you^ ^ from the Hatches of the ship, then it seem^ ^ loin
Hill, and on the top on the east side thereof is a little valley, and it seems
to bee half a ships length, and on the west side of the Hill, is likewise a
little valley: and it seems also to bee about a ships length long, and ^ that
^halle^ upon the west side stand 2. little Hills, and the uttermost of the two
is the greatest. And then there ^ high hill a good way within the land, and
that lies a little ^ east the foresaid rock.

And when you are off from the said out Rock northwest and by north then you
can perceive but one Hillock upon that valley that lies at the west end of the
Rock, and then the foresaid high hill lies a little to the westwards of the out
rock, and when you are a kenning from the land, west and by North of the Rock,
that is the East end of the foresaid deep Rock, and the west end goes down a
little slope, and you shall see a little hill or knot on the West side of it,
and then westwards from the said Rock lies another outer rock, which is
something lower and ^lmoste round. And on the east side of the Rock lies a
little ^not, and that i^ something greater, and a little way to the westwards
of the same, lies yet two out Rocks more and are proportioned like as if they
were long h^lles, and the east side is the longest. And between those ^ lye
also 2 little small Rocks not much aboue the water, and ^hen a man is a kenning
northeast from the foresaid long hill, if ye look out of the top, then it is
all along between those out Rocks full of Rocks: and at the west end of the
broadest long hill doe also lye long Rocks, and then a good way westwards of
them lies a long ledge of l^we Rocke^, and those lie in four or five parts, and
in in the ^ lye four round hillocks, which are little higher then the l^ge, and
the most easterly hillock lies alone a little to the Eastwards from the ledge.

And then when you are past over the Stert, so far that you can see the land to
the northw^ of Blanch haven, then is there a long high hill, and is a good way
on the top all plain, and both the ends go ^ping down.

The course of the tides of Portugal, Spain, and France.
ITem, at Calis Malis, an East southeast Moon makes a lowe water.

At saint Lucas of Barame^he, a southeast and by east Moon makes a lowe water,
and so along from thence to the River of Lishborne the like.

Item all the Coast of Spain, Gascoine, Poitow, and Britain, till Fontenie
head: a southeast Moon makes lowe water.

Item, in the River of Bordeaux at the mouth, a southeast and by south moon
makes a lowe water.

Item, in the race of Fontenie, a southeast and by east Moon makes a lowe
water.

Item, at saint Matthews, a southeast and by south moon makes a lowe wat^r.

Item a south sout^ ^a^t Moon makes a lowe water at the Fourn^.

And likewise a south southeast Moon makes a lowe water at Aberwrack^.

Item, at the ^ Base or Roscow which is within that Island, and li^ ^ ^ennings
to the Eastwards of the Fourne, a south moon makes a lowe water, and within th^
Island, a south southeast m^one.

Item, two ^ without Ushant, a South moon makes a lowe water, and the same tide
holds to the Isle of Base.

Item, in the fair way off of Ushant, a southwest moon^ makes a lowe ^.

Item, seven ^ within the isle of Base, a southwest moon makes a ^.

Item before ^, a south and by west moon makes a lowe water.

At the Set Isles, a south southwest moon makes a low water, and four leagues ^
seaboord the Isles, a southwest and by south moon m^kes a lowe water.

Item, before the Lands of Briehack, a south southwest moon makes a lowe water.

And from Briehack to within the haven of S. Malloes, a south and by east moon
makes a low water on the shore.

And without in the fair way, from the Isle of Base to Saint Malloes, a
southwest and by south moon makes a lowe water.

Item, from Rock to saint Mallowes, and from Granuile to Garnesey, there a
south moon makes a lowe water.

And within the road of Garnsey, a south and by east moon makes a low water.

Item from Ga^nsey to the Caskets a southw^st moon makes a lowe water.

And 6. or 7. leagues without Garnsey, a southwest and by west Moon makes a
lowe water.

Item between Caskets and Portland, a southwest and by west Moon makes a low ^
the Coast and 7. or 8. leagues a sea board, a west southwest Moon makes a lowe
water.

Item, from Bearfleete to the Seinh^, in the fair way a west southwest Moon
makes ^, and when it is a high spring, then a west ^ ^oone makes a lowe water.

Item from the point of ^ within the River of Seine, a West and by south ^o^ne
makes a lowe water.

Item a southwest Moon makes a lowe water in the river of Seine within.

From the Strowter to Some, in the f^ire way, a south and by west Moon makes a
low^ ^.

Item, at Some in the Fosse, a ^ southwest Moon makes a lowe water, and at ^, a
west southwest moon makes a lowe water, and at a west Moon it is but little
flood.

Item, at Bullein and at Callic^, at Grovelling, at Dunkirk, Newport, and along
all the Coast of Flaunders a west Moon makes a lowe water.

Waltersland.
Item from Waltersland to the abbey of the Brothers a southwest and by west
Moon makes a still water. And from thence to Blankenborow, and saint Katherins,
a southwest Moon makes a still water. And from Blankenborowe to Saint
Katherins, a southwest Moon makes a still water.

Item, a south Moon makes a high water at Swine.

Of the Havens along the Coasts of Spain and Portugal.
ITem hee that will sail into Ribadewe, hee shall go in hard by the point on
the east side and then hee shall keep forth in the midst of the River, till hee
come open of the sandy Bay, and there hee may come to ancker at six, seven or
eight fathom.

And from Ribadewe eight Leagues to the Northwestwards, lies the sound of
Utueris, and he that will go into Uiueris with a southwest wind, hee will go in
by a high point on the west side: and then let him keep on in the midst of the
harborough, going in a good way. And then come to an Ancker, where hee shall
think good, at ten or twelve fathom.

Item, west northwest from Uiueris, six Leagues off, lies the point of
Ortingall, and it is a high land and without the point there stands five or six
high Rocks, which may bee seen in the Seawards, at the least two kennings of
from the land. And those are Cleues, and there is between them and the land 1^
fathom.

On the east side of Ortingall is a barred haven, and that goes to the town of
Saint Matthews. And hee that will ride there, let him ancker before the
Village, called Karinoo, which lies beneath the Castle of Ortingall. And that
is but a quarter of a league from the Rocks, which lye of the southwards. And
hee shall have the Village North from him.

And Northwest from Ortiger three leagues or more, lies, the Haven of Sidero,
which is a good harborough: and goes Southwest in. And the Southside is a lowe
point, and he that will go in there, let him keep by the south side for the
northside is all Rocky and soul ground. And when he hath sailed a little way
in, let him ancker at six, seven, or eight fathom.



When you are north northeast from the Cape Prior, about five or six leagues,
then doth the Cape show as here aboue is set forth.

Item, the flat end is the southeast end, and the other end is the northwest
end, and it lies by the Sea, and it is a high Hill and all ragged aloft. When
as you are to the northward, or southwestwards from the Cape Prior, and that
you are not far off from it, then is the Cape very high all along, and seems on
the top of it, as though there were many men sitting on a row, every one a
little way from another: and in the Northside of the Cape lies two sandy Bays
one by another, and on the north northeast corner of the Cape lies a row of
lowe Rocks, and in the midst of the row lies a great Rock, like as it were a
stack of Hay. And when you are come within the Cape, then is there lying on the
south side of the Cape a sandye Bay, and to the south of the sandye Bay, lies a
lowe flat Hill, which is not half so high as the high land that lies within it:
and westward from the south end of the flat hill, there lies two great Rocks
hard one by another, and to the southwards of the sandye Bay, lies a point out
from the entry, within which is the Haven of Faroll.

When you will sail into the Haven of Faroll, you shall bear into the sound of
the Groin, so long till you see the Haven of Faroll open on your Larbooad side,
and then you may bear boldly in with it. And when you are in, then before the
town of Farol, you must go no farther, for within is all should, the haven lies
Northeast in, and it is a good Haven for Carat which are bound southwards.

He that will sail into the Groin, shall keep his course from Cape Prior South
and by east towards the Groin, and if he be without the Cape Prior, then let
him keep nearest to the East side, for the Westerside is all foul ground. And
he shall see to the southwards from him about two leagues off or more, along
small tower with a flat head, and doth not show veri^ hi^h abo^e the Sea: and
southward from that tower, as you would judge two bow shoots of* there stands
the town of the Groin: and at the Southeast end of the town stands a Castle,
and there is a great four cornered Tower which hath no covering aboue to be
seen: and to the Eastward from the Castle, about four ship^ lengthe^ from ^he
shore, there lies a ledge of Rocks, and when it is a full se^, then you shall
see but three or four rocks break aboue the water, but when it is a low water,
then you shall see a great many. And Southward from the Castle about four ships
length from the land, there lies a little greene Hill, and on that stands a
little Church of S. Anthonies, and it seem^ as though it were a little flat
house, and you must leave the high Tower* the ragged Rocks, with the lowe ^,
and that greene little hill altogether on your s^arboord side, and when ye are
clean past that greene ^ towards, go westwards in before the Town, ^ hee clean
defended from the Sea, then ye may anchor where you will and in what depth ye
list.

Item, Sisarge l^es a little to the westwards of ye Groin^ and there is a
little Island, and is ^ on the top, and when you are a little way within the
Cape Prior, you may then see betwixt that little Island and Sisarge, and there
is no good Road under Sisarge, for the ground is not clean.



When you are northwest and by north of Mongie, then it shows as here aboue is
set forth.

Item, he that will sail into Mongie, and comes from the eastwards, he shall
find without at the east point a great high Rock which is called Uillen, and by
it stand high cliffs, which are sharpe on the top, there stands 3. or 4. of
them a good way a sunder one from another, and they lye East south east and
west northwest, and along north from this point; and to the westwards about
four cable length of there lies a Rock under water: that hee must leave to the
stereboorde side of him, and when he^ is past the Rock, then let him go
southwest in and then when he shall see the ^hurch of our Lady that is to the
wes^wa^ds, then let him sail directly towards it, and then he may anchor before
the town, or between the Town and the Church at 7. or 8. fathom.



Item, when you are from Mongie North and by West then it shows in this sort.

Item h^ that will sail ^, and comes from the westwards let him keep the ^ the
Groin without the point which lies there within, which is a great round point,
of a Ships length and it is called Bontrie, going thus till you have opened our
Ladies church, and when ye can see the church, ye may anchor at 12. or 15.
fathom in the sou^d, or ye may sail^ in before the d^sage to the best road.

Item, betwixt cape Finister and the point of the Groin lies a ledge of rocks
half a league into the seawards.

And whosoever will sail into Mongie, let him take heed of those rocks. And
betwixt Finister and the Groin lies a great sandy Bay: where is good riding
with an east wind at 10. or 12. fathom.

Item, when you have the Cape of Finister southeast and yeast from you or there
abouts, and are distant from it about five leagues or more, then it seems to be
as is figured aboue.

Item he that will ride under Cape Finister, let him sail two Cable length off
from the Cape, and go so on a good League till ye see our Ladies Church, and
then let him anchor against the Church at 10. or 12. fath. but when hee hath
the Cape west from him, there is no good road for a south wind, for the ground
there is foul and rocky all about.

Item, half a league to the southwards of Cape Finister lies a good haven for
ships that are bound southward which is called Seche, and lies eastwards from
the Cape: to go into that haven, you must sail in on the North side, but you
may not come very no the North land, for it is not all clear of Rocks no the
shore. And when you come ny the haven, there lies a black Rock not much aboue
the water, which you must leave on the sterboord side and sail in about the
midst, between the rock and a point^ that lies towards Cape Finister, going so
a good way into the northwards, keeping you in the middle of the sound, till
you see a sandy Bay to the Stereboord side of you, and against that sandy Bay,
you may anchor at 10.11. or 12. fathom: and if you go further in it is
shalsower.

Four leagues fro^ Cape Finister, to the southeastwards, lies ta^ point of
Mounteluer, and in the course thither lye many rocks on both sides, and the
most part of the rocks that may hurt you, are in sight. Mounteluer is a great
rou^d hill, and there is a little tower on the top of it, and that is the north
point of the Moors.

Hee that will sail into Haven of Moors he must first bring the middle of the
Mounteluer right over a little valley, and when he comes before the Haven, then
let him run in east northeast towards Mounteluer, and when hee is against
Mounteluer, hee shall then see another high point lying on the Larbooad side of
him, and then he shall sail off fro^ Mounteluer in towards the other point, and
then hee shall see the Town to the Westwards before him, and then let him sail
in before the Town, till hee come to twelve or fifteen fathom, and there
anchor.

Hee that will sail into Pontasedre, hee must sail in by the Island called
Bleedednes which is a flat land.

Then hee shall keep the south side, going East northeast two leagues, and then
hee shall finds before the midst of the haven a little Island, he shall leave
that on hi^ Larb^ord side, and to the southward of the Island, hee shall see a
great Tower: then let him sail directly before the tower, and there come to an
ancker, at six, seven or eight Fatha^, and hee will ride under that Island,
which lies before the middle of the haven, let him bring the Island to the
westwards of him and so ancker at 7. or 8. fathom.

Hee that will go in to ride under the Lands of Bayon, let him keep near to the
Island: for at the northeast point of the Island, there lies a rock under
water, about a cables length from the point, otherwise all is clear.

He that comes out of the sea with the Lands of Bayon he shall not perceive any
other land but Gray Cliffs, and he that will sail in there coming from the
south let him leave the rocks which are in the southside of the Island between
him and the Island, and so sail in by the middlemoste Island, wherein the
Eremetage stands. Over against the great sandye Bay^, there is the best road in
twelve or fourteen fathom, and you may ride so nigh, till you have brought that
north end of the Island directly with that land which lies to the northwards of
the Island.

Hee that will sail into Bayon* let him sail in between the little Island of
Baiona, that lies on the north side of the eu^rie and the town, going in East
and by north, till he bee as far within as the lowe town, which he shall see on
the south side, and there he may anchor at ten or twelve fathom: but he must
take great heed of a ledge of rocks that lie off the Island on the north side.

I^em* there lye five or six rocks by the point or corner of ye Cape Pasalis
these he must leave on ye stereboord side: and he needs not come to ancker,
before he see them shut in the other point that the high town stands on.

Item 19. Leagues to the southwards of this Island of Bayona, lies the river of
Portugal.

Item the river of the port of Portugal, is a good bard haven, and hee that
will go in there, must keep the south side ^ee^st him. And let him take good
heed of the Rocks which lie at the entering into the haven, and that is but a
short cut in. The south side is a lower land then the north side is.

Item, eleven leagues to the southwards of the port of Portugal, lies the haven
Aueiro.

Item, the Haven of Aueiro is a bard haven, and the land by the water side is a
lowe sandy land: To sail into this Haven, you must take your marks upon the
south land, and those are three Beacons of mastes, those three Beacons must be
kept in one, so long till you bee come almost hard by them, then you must set
of northwards from them towards the other Shingle, which lies in the North side
of the Haven, and there ye may ancker at seven or eight fathom.

Item, seven leagues by south that haven, there lies the point of Teliacke by
Mo^dego, which is a fair foreland, and from the south point of Teliacke, a mile
to the east, southeastwards: there lies Mondego, which is a bard haven.

And westward from that haven a quarter of a league from the land, lies a bank
of seven fathom, and behind that one may ride in 12. or 13. Fathom, it is there
good ground and fair, and there is a village thereby North Northeast from the
road.

He that will ancker under the Burlings, let him ancker before the Eremitage at
ten Fathom, hee may come to it by which side he will, for it is clear there of
danger.

Twelve Leagues to the S. southeast of the Burlinges, there lies the Cape of
Rocksemper, a little within that point is the Road of Kaskales and he that will
ride there may anchor where hee list, for there is good anchor hold in every
place, but no covert for a southwest wind.

Then a league Eastwards from the Kaskals of saint Gilians point and is the
north point of the River of Lisbon, and hee that will sail in by the Northland,
hee must keep the middle, and sail in betwixt the point of of saint Gillians,
and the land of the Kachopes, till he be within ^he point of saint Gillians,
and then let him sail on forth by the Northland till hee come to saint
Katherins Bay, and then he must keep off again from thence towards the S. land,
for fear of the Rocks which lye by the Rastelles a bow shoot from the north
land, and that rock is at a lowe water in sight, and at half flood it is under
water.

The first white Church is Saint Katherins Church, which stands upon the
foreland of saint Gillians to the Eastwards by the water side, and the other
Church is the Rastelles and southeast from thence in twelve Fathom, is a good
road for all winds.

He that will sail in by the great deep of Lisbon coming from the southwards,
let him leave the sand of the Kachopes on his Larbooad side, and all the other
sands that break on his Sterboord side and then he shall see the white sandy
Bay that lies next to the Eastwards of the point of Saint Gillians, and keep
that Northeast and by north of him going still along the Kachop^s in 6. or 7
fathom and by these marks he may sail into the Bay of saint Katherins and then
let him keep two third parts of the river on his Larbooad side, and the other
third part on the s^rboord, and sail on so until he come before the town of
Lisbon, and he that will ancker before the Coppers, let him ancker before the
Lime Kill and more a thwart the River, and lay the one anchor at 13. fathom,
and the other at 4 f^t^am.

He that will sail in before the Fisher town, let him not come near the shore
before the Coppers gate, for there lies a rock a pretty way off, and it is il
riding thereabout in any place, because the streams turns about so there at ye
eb, and it is all rocky.

Item, within a stones cast to the southwards of the Kachopes is 8. fathom
deep, and by the same sand by the south side, it is 13. fathom deep within a
Ships length of the sand. And let him that will sail out at Saint Gillians
deep, take good heed of the ebb, for that sets sore towards the sand of
Kachopes.

Item, hee that will sail in by the great deep of Lisbon, let him bring the
Castle of the Rastelles east, and by north of him, or let him bring the tower
of the Rastelles to the northwards of the souther foreland, keeping them so
till hee have brought the little Church at S. Gilians point North northeast, or
there about from him, then go northeast off it towards S. Katherins bay: and
always reckon your tides well.

He that will sail to S. Toous, hee must have half flood with him, and must
sail east from Cape Pitcher, then hee shall see before him to the northwards, a
great high land, when he is past that high land, then let him keep the point of
Cape Pitcher open a good way without the high land, going with those marks till
he see the Tower to the northwards of him, then let him sail right with the
Tower, till he come near to it. And when he is as far in as the Tower, then let
him edge into the middle of the channel, and ancker at ten fathom.



Item, when you are off from Cape S. Uincent West or thereabout, then doth it
show as is aboue figured.

He that will ride under Cape S. Uincent, shall pass on by the first point, and
sail a League further in under the other point by a red land, and there ancker
at 15. or 20. Fathom, for the ground is all clean thereabouts, and ye may sail
fast by the shore that ye may in manner leap a land.

Hee that will sail into S. Lucas, hee shall at the entering into the mouth of
the river of Civil, when hee is without before the haven, keep the steeple or
Tower of S. Lucas to the eastwards of him, and so go in at six fathom, and ye
shall continue so at six fathom almost a league. And when hee comes in six
fathom he may ancker, and then he shall have have pilots come to him.

Item, to the westwards of S. Lucas lies a sandy Bay* and you may sail along by
that in six fathom, or come to an ancker if you list.

Item, if a man come from the Northwards, or North westwards then the point of
Chipiona lies thus, and to the southwestwards about two bow shoots, stands a
castle at the utter point of the land, and shows in form as here appears. four
bow shoots at the westwards of that, are certain rocks, which at a lowe water
are dry, that you may see them, you may by night come no near to them then 12.
or 13. Fathom, and then from thence to Rotta the coast is Southeast three
leagues and it is all a white shore and Southeast from Rotta lies out a ledge
of rocks about two bow shoots off the shore, and appears always aboue water,
behind that is the road for small ships, And the Castle of Rotta shows thus,
and the village stands a little to off the Northward or there abouts, and hath
such a flat steeple, as is here portrayed. go with S Marie port then go E. or
East and by south, and shun the north shore something, for fear of the rock
that lies about the midst of the Chruel, about north from the Porkers, and if
you will go to the southward of the rock then take h^e of the Porkers, yet you
may come meetely near them, for it is indifferent clear ground to turn in at
five or six fathom.



WHen Callismallis is northward of you, then doth it show thus, as is aboue set
forth.

Hee that will ride before Callis, let him sail in by the Rocks which lie to
the westwards of Callis, which are called the Porkers, and he must leave them
Rocks on the steereboord side, and bear in at six Fathom or more. And when he
is 3. or 4. cables length within the Porkers, that he may see the Town of
Callis open to the southwards, or South south west from him, then let him
ancker, at 3.4. 5. or 6, fathom. And right off the Porkers to the northward lye
sonken rocks, and there is at a lowe water but a fathom and a half upon them,

Item, the marks for the rock which lies between Rotta and the Porkers in the
channel are these, when S. Katherine Chapel which stands by west S. Maries Port
by the waters side, and the house that stands upon the high hill which you go
over, two shears be brought in one And S, Maries Cloister in Callis without the
north point of Callis, and also two high hills lying to the East northeast, or
thereabouts from you brought together, also after this manner, as is here under
showed, the less under the greater then are you even hard by the said rock.



Item, when you are come out of the sea, with a large wind, then keep the two
hills open in that order, as they stand aboue figured, but if hee keep them
shut in one then ye go directly upon the rock.

The Tides along the coast of Ireland and England.
ITem, on the West part of Ireland, an east northeast, or a west southwest Moon
makes a full sea.

Item to the Bay of Carmardin, in the mouth of Seuerne, and without in the
Channel, and at the Momlesse, an East and by north, or West and by south Moon
makes a full sea.

Item at the Island of Londey, an East Moon makes a full sea, and the same tid
holds to the Holmes. And at Bristowe an east and by south moon makes a full
sea.

Item, a northeast and by east, or a southwest and by south Moon makes a full
Sea at Silly.

Item* in Mousehole and in Falmouth an east northeast Moon makes a full Sea,
and three or four Leagues off the shore in the fair way, an east southeast Moon
makes a full Sea.

Thwart of Falmouth and Foye in the midst of the Channel, an east and by south
Moon makes a full Sea.

Thwart of Plimouth and Dartmouth, and all betwixt that and Portland in the
middle of the channel, an east southeast Moon makes a full sea.

In Foy, in Plimouth and Dartmouth, an east and by-north moon makes a full sea.

In the fair way between Dartmouth and Portland a southeast and by south moon
makes a full sea.

In the midst of the channel over against Portsmouth a south southeast Moon
makes a full sea. And the like tide is off the Isle of Wight in the midst of
the channel.

Po^tland.
IN the r^ce of Portland, a southeast moon makes a full ^ea, and in the road of
Portland, an East Southeast Moon makes a full sea.

A southeast and by south Moon, makes a full sea at the Needles in Wight. And
the same tide goes to Wolter horn on the land, and 3. or four leagues a
seaboord, a south and by east moon makes a full sea, and at saint Ellen a
southeast moon.

And it is to be noted that the flood sets in at the east end of Wight, till
the moon be at southeast or northwest.

At Calshot, Hampton, and at Portsmouth, a south and by east Moon makes a full
Sea, before Hampton a south moon makes a full sea.

From Wight to beachy, a south and by east Moon makes a full sea on the shore.

At Rye in the Cammer and Winchelsey, a south and by east Moon makes a full
sea, and without in the O^tune a south southwest Moon.

A south southwest Moon, makes a full sea in the road at Dongie Ness, and a
south moon upon the Stell, and without in the channel there a southwest moon
makes a full sea.

From the Ness to Romney head, a southwest Moon makes a full sea.

In the Channel and hard by the head, a southeast or north west Moon makes a
low water.

Item, a south moon makes a full sea at Dover, and in the Downs and at Tennet,
a south southwest Moon makes a full Sea, and a south or north Moon makes a full
Sea at the Shore.

The course of the streams of Ireland, and England.
IN primis, from the Cape o^ Dorsey, to the Island called Dordon, the flood
runs north northwest, and the ebb sets south southeast.

From Dorsey to Cape clear the flood runs East and by north, and the ebb west
and by south.

From the Cape of Clear to the Lands called Salties, the flood runs east
northeast, and the ebb west southwest.

From the Cape of Ireland to the Island of Londey, the floods sets in northeast
and by east, and the ebb southwest and by west.

From Londey to Milford, the flood goes east southeast and the ebb west south
west.

From Milforde to Calvie, to the Bay of Carmardin which is the mouth of
Seuerne, and to the Lands of Momlesse, the flood runs northeast, and the ebb
southwest.

In the midst of the mouth of S. Georges channel, the flood runs north
northeast, and the ebb west Southwest.

In the Channel of Bristowe, the flood sets east northeast, and the ebb west
southwest.

From Silly to the Lyzart, the flood runs East and by north, and ebbes west and
by south.

From Silly to the lands end of England, the flood sets east northeast, and the
ebb west southwest.

From the Point of the lands end, to the cape of the Lizard: the flood sets
east, and the ebb west.

From the Lyzart to the Stert, the flood sets northeast and by east, and the
ebb southwest and by west.

Item, in the middle of the channel, against Falmouth, Foy* Plimouth, and the
Stert, the flood runs northeast, and the ebb west southwest.

From the Stert to Portland in the middle of the Channel, the flood runs East
north east, and the ebb West southwest.

Against Dartmouth about two leagues from the shore, the ebb sets southwest and
by south, and to the Eastward, and on the south southwest side of the entering
in towards E^cester, about two leagues from the shore, the ebb sets likewise
southwest and by south.

Portland.
ITem, within Portland in the Bay, the flood sets northeast and the ebb
southwest.

From Portland to Wight that flood runs east and by north, and the ebb west and
by south.

From Wight to Beachy, the flood runs East and by north, and no to the land in
15. fathom, the flood runs northeast and by east, and the ebb southwest and by
west

He that will sail into Silly coming from by South, let him look well in time,
and take good heed of the rocks which lie in the midst of the sou^d ^ight
before the mouth, and hee may sail in on either side, ^ut it is best to keep
next to the east side, and keep the steeples or towers in the middle of the
same Bay* and then he may bear in an anchor at 6.7. or 8. fathom.



Item, when the Beel or point of Portland bears northeast and by east from you,
and that you are 2. leagues or more from the shore, then doth it show thus as
before is portrayed: but to the Westwards is much more land then here is set
forth, and a great deal of the west part, the land seems whitely to look to.



Item, when Portland bears North and by East from you, and that you are five or
six leagues off from the land, then it shows thus as aboue: and when it lies
north Northeast from you, then it seems plain ab^e and r^nd to look on, From
Dongie Ness to Dover, the f^oud sets Northeast and by East, and the ebb
northwest and by west, At the south foreland the flood sets northeast and by
north and the ebb southwest and by south.

Hereafter follow the havens along the west coast of England.
ITem, east northeast from Beachy nine leagues off lies the Ness, which is a
fair lowe point westward from the Ness, two leagues off lies the Cammer of Rye*
a bard haven, and hee that will sail into the Cammer coming from by west, he
must keep Beachy open without the point of Fairlee, and bear Eastwards in till
hee have brought the house northwest from him, and then sail by the Shingle in,
and when hee comes at the end of the Shingle, then let him anchor within a
cables length of ye Shingle northwest from the point in ten Fathom, it is not
wide there,



Item, when Beachy lies northwest and by north from you, and that you are about
four or five leagues from the land, then it shows thus: and it is a white
chalky land.

Item, he that will ride under Beachy hee may ancker where he will, the East
side is all should, and on the West side is all good ground.



Item when Beachy lies northeast off from you, and that you are two leagues
from the land, then doth it appear thus, as aboue is figured.

Beachy lies from the Caskets, northeast and by east about forty leagues.



Item, when Wight bears Northwest from you, and that you are fou^e leagues from
the land, there you shall have 35. fathom, and the ground is great rough
stones.

Hee that will sail^ in at the east end of Wight, let him take heed of the
Ow^s, and fetch the sholding of the west side of the depth before saint Ellin
Church, and there hee may ride at seven or eight Fathom. And hee that will sail
in, let him bring the Lime kill that lies aboue Portsmouth, and the steeple of
Portesemouth in one, and so sail in keeping two third ^ of the channel on the
Larbooad side and sail in so to ^.

At the East end of Wight a northwest Moon makes the entry of the first quarter
of the flood.

He that will sail in at the west end of Wight, he must look well to the tide,
for the flood sets very sore upon the needles, and the ebb likewise westwards
upon the Swingilles, and chalky Rocks, which lies westwards of the Needles, and
is very narrow between the Needles and the swingilles, and let him directly
sail with the Needles, even that he come fast by them, and sail in very near
them, and when he is on^e within the Needles, then let him keep off from the
land before him because of the ^ocks called the Wardens, which lies on the
Wight side near the shore.

And hee that will ride under the Beachy which lies on the other side, let him
ancker at seven Fathom, and if hee will go any further in, let him keep two
third pa^ts of the Channel towards the maine land, and sail so in till hee come
before the Village of Yarmouth where the new Bulwark stands upon the Wight
side: and if he will sail up to Caus^o^, then he must sail on till hee may see
the town of Hampton appe^r without the abbey, and ancker nearest to the west
part of Causho^.

He that will ride without Hurst by the Needles, let him bear in and ancker
before the Village in the North Channel at three Fathom at a lowe water, and he
shall ^aue the Needles South southeast from him, and at a deep tide, ^he ^ ^
flood doth not rise there aboue one Fathom.

He that will ride in Portland road, let him ancker at ^. fathom.

Item, 12. leagues to the Westwards of Portland, is a road called Torbaie, and
lies within the head which is called the Berry, and Portland and that lie east
and West, and on the East side of the Berry head stands a Church and there
against the Church is very good riding at 6. or 7. Fathom.

Item, when as Torbay bears North Northwest from you, and that you are about
three Leagues from the shore, then the land appears in this fashion.







Hee that will ancker under the south point of Torbay let him ride at 7.
Fathom, and he shall ride well for a southeast wind.





Item, when Der^mouth bears north northwest from you, and the point of Torbay
north and by east of you, then shows the Stert and Dertmouth after this manner
as is here figured, and then you may see the little Bulwark in the East side.
and Sa. Patricks chapel in the west side, and a little ^lat Church to the
westwards of you.

Item, the Stert lies from the Fourne, north Northeast easterly, and they are
distant 43. leagues.

Item, when the Stert is west northwest from you, and two leagues off from it,
then doth it show like as is aboue portrayed.



Item, when the Stert bears Northwest from you, and you being 4. or 5. leagues
off it, then doth it show like as is here aboue set forth.

Portland lies from Ushant Northeast, and is distant 48 leagues.



Item, when Portland lies west and by north from you, then it shows after this
manner.

Item, when Portland bears Northeast and by North, then doth it show thus.

He that will sail into Dertmouth, let him go directly with Saint Patricks
Chapel, which stands on the west point of the Haven, and let him take heed that
he doe not bring that village which stands within on the west side of the haven
without Saint Patrickes Church, but let him keep the uttermost house of the
same Village on the East side of the haven a way in sight without the Bulwark
of the west side by Saint Patri^kes Chapel, and then can he not take any hurt
on the rocks in the Range by the West p^int, and when hee is a little way
within the point that lies on the east side, he shall see a sharpe corner of a
Cliff, and without ye sharpe corner of the Cliff lies a rock under water very
dangerous, let him leave yt on the steereboord side, and when he is past that
Rock then he may keep himself in the midst of the haven, and bear in without
danger.

He that will ride under the Stert, let him Ancker in ten Fathom there hee
shall have cle^n^ ^round: the road is to the Eastwards of the S^ert. To the
West Northwestwards of the Start six leagues, goes in the sound of Plimouth, he
that will go in there, must bear in the midst of the sound directly with an
Island that hath a Chapel on it: and if hee be disposed to ri^ within the
Island: when he is so far in as the Island, then hee must borough hard by the
East side thereof in 10. ^a^ham, and when hee hath brought the Island to the
southwards of him, let him anchor in six or seven fathom.

He that will sail into the E^ster harborough which is Catwater, let him go
along by the east shore, ^ill he come before the Blockhou^e at the entry of
Catwater, and hee must take very good heed of the southeast point of the entry
of Catwater, for it is al foul ground and shallow, let him sail in by the
N^rthwest point within two ships length of the Blockehouse, and then run into
the northeast and by E. about a bows shoot in and ancker in 4.5. or 6. fathom.

To the Westwards of Plimouth lies a round hedge, which is called Rams head,
and south and to the westwards of that 3. leagues into the sea, lies a rock
which is called the Edie stone, and it lies south southwest southerly from the
Howe of P^imouth.

He that will ride under the Rams head to the eastwards may ancker at eight or
nine Fathom within a bow shoot of the Cape, for there is all clean ground.

Item* four leagues from the Rams head to the Westw^rds, l^s an Island hard by
the shore, and it is a little round Island and with small Barqus ye may ride
within it, and go through betwixt the maine and in the east side is the best
coming in, and the best riding is against the midst of the Island, hard by it
to ye eastwards goes in Lowe haven.

Item, two leagues to the eastward of Lowe, lies the haven of Foye, and a
little byeast Foye, lies a Rock under water, and so long as you can see Lowe
Island without the point which lies to the westwards of it, you can take no
hurt by it.

Item, Foye is a bard haven, and at the entry of the haven, there sta^ds on
either side upon the high land, a church, and that which stands on the east
side is the lesser, they are square towers something white, and hath a flat
steeple at the west end.

He that will sail into the haven of Foye, must have half flood at the least,
and let him sail in the midst of the chanel, and when he is between the two
points, he may keep along which shore he will, but the west shore is the widest
chanel, by the stakes and tower of the steeple which stands in the west side of
the haven: and if he come in by the west shore, then he must when he is within
those stakes, bear off a little from the west shore, almost into the midst of
the channel next to the west shore. Before the village which lies on the west
side, is a little dock, and there a ship may lye a flote at a lowe water, or ye
may sail further in, and then you shall see a wall standing on the west side of
the haven, and a village behind it, there is good ankering a ships length by
south that wall on the east side, but ye must ride by two Cables, or else you
may sail further in along by that Swach that lies on the west side, wherein the
water mill stands, but take heed you come not too nigh the north corner of the
Swach, for there lies a rock, and when you are a little past that. ye may row
into the midst of the stream, there is best lying for ships that draw much
water: and to the southwards of the foresaid wall, a ship that draws 18. foot
water, may well ride a flote

Item, there lies within the east point, a village even at the first entry, and
before the village is a poole, where two or three ships may well lye, and the
deepest is within at the east point. And if he that comes in by the east shore,
will not go into that poole, then let him (when he comes a little way within
the stakes on ^he east shore) fall something off, and keep nearest to the west
shore, for on the east side lies a Flat all along, until you come against the
first house of the west village. And if perchance the wind were so scarce that
you cannot bear in, then ye may come to an anchor without, so as the ship may
ride without the stakes. And then ye may warp in with Hausers, and lye behind
t^e stakes, with a ship that draws twelve or fourt^ene soot water a flote at a
lowe water.

Item, the haven lies N. northeast in, till you be past the Church of the
Village which lies on the west side, and then it lies north in, till you be
past the watermill, and then north northeast in.

And he that will anchor without, to tarry his tide, or for any other occasion,
he may come to an anchor at six, seven, o^ eight fathom, so that he have the
Church that stands on the east side, north northeast of him, for there it is
clean ground all without.

The haven of Foye and Daddeman, lye the one off the other, southwest and
northeast.

Whosoever sails into ^almouth, l^t him take good heed of the rock that lies
without in the middlo before the entering. And he may leave the rock on which
side he will, but the deepest water is to the eastward of the rocks. And when
you are past the rock, then may you anchor in the midst of the haven where you
will, at five, six, or seven fathom, and take heed how you sail in any further,
for fear of the banks which lye within. And if you will sail within the banks,
then you must have good knowledge of the marks of the haven.

He that will sail into Helford, had need to take a quarthe flood with him, and
let him sail by the east point nigh the land at four fathom, till he see the
steeple on the southside bear south of him; then he may anchor against the
steeple at four fathom. And by the west point lies a rock under the water, in
the west side of the haven.

He that will come to anchor in the road of Moushole, he must sail hard to
bywest of a high round hill, and to the northwards of the hills side, lies a
white ledge of rocks on the shore, and against that is the road, in five or at
seven fathom, it is not very clean ground.

He that comes from the south, and will sail into Silly, let him look out in
time, for fear of the Rocks, which lye in the middle of the entering, right
before the mouth on either side, but it is the best to keep nearer the east
side, and then keep the Church of Saint Maries in the midst of the sandy Bay,
and then you may anchor at six, seven, or eight fathom.

Item Silly lies west southwest off the lands end of England nine leagues

Item, from the point of the lands end, to the Lizard, the course is southeast
and by east eight or nine leagues.

Sands at the Thames mouth.
NOw to know the marks of the last, there stands a thick bushy tree upon the
foreland, and you must bring Margate by south off that Bushy tree, to sight
wit^in two yards length, and keep them so, and you shall pass between the
Norther and the Souther last, and when ye have brought the recouluers in one,
then are you out of ye danger of the Lasts, then keep on your foresaid course
toward Sheppy, and when you have brought the high land Sheppy to the Southward
of you, then you shall see a white Church standing on the North side, and three
or four high trees there by it, bring the said white steeple into the trees,
and go so into the lowernesse, and the you shall come to the sea Rocks, and
that lies West Northwest in.

At the Foreland, a south or north Moon makes a full sea, and the Reculuers are
two sharpe steeples upon one Church, take heed you come not on the lands end at
a lowe water, for there is not aboue two foot water deep.

The depths over against England.
IN primis, the Coast of Flaunders in the right and used channel, is not aboue
24. fathom deep.

In the midst of the chanel between Dover and Blackenesse, lies a bank, which
hath not at a lowe water aboue 3. fathom deep on it.

And within half a league to the southwards of the bank it is 27. fathom deep,
and to the northwards, five and twenty fathom.

Between Winchelsey and Pickardie, the depth is 26. fathom.

Item, under Ouldersey in the channel, the depth is 25. fathom.

Item, the channel by east of Beachy, two leagues off, is 27. fathom deep.

Between Beachy and Seine head, in the channel, is 38 or 40 fathom deep.

Between Wight and Beachy, it is in the channel, 38. or 40. fathom deep,

And three leagues without Wight, it is 37. fathom deep and it is not very
clean ground there.

Item, from Berefleete to the midst of the depth of the channel, you shall find
it all rocky, and from the midst of the channel, to the East of England, it is
all clear ground,

It is very perilous to trust to sounding by the Island of Aldernay, for hard
by the land is forty fathom deep, and west southwest off, by the Kaskets, it is
eight and thirty fathom deep.

Between Portland and the Kaskets, in the channel, is forty fathom And two
leagues a sea-boord the Island of Aldernaye, is a certain place, which is but
thirty fathom deep, whereas in all other places between Porteland, and that
Island, it is forty Fathom deep in the channel.

Item to the south southwestward, about a kenning from the Stert is about forty
Fathom, and the ground is red sandy clay.

South southeast into the Sea from the Stert, and a kenning of it, is 45.
Fathom deep, and sailing from that depth southeast a little further forth, ye
shall find 55. fathom. And these uncertain deeps are between Rocketo and the
Stert.

Item, to the Southwards of the high land of Dertmouth in the sight of the
land, it is about 43. fathom deep, and the ground is white sand, with some
little shells amongst it, and very little small long things like unto such
Maggots as are sometimes in Bacon.

Item, 5. or 6. Leagues southwest from the Stert is 40. Fathom deep, and the
ground is gray red sand, reddish, and shellie.

Item, 10. or 12. leagues Southwest from the Stert it is 47. fathom deep, the
ground is black gross sand and shellie and little rough things like Maggots,
with some small stones amongst.

Between Dartmouth and Set Isles, in the channel is 55. Fathom, and from the
town of Plimmouth 4. leagues south southwest into the Sea, it is 30. fathom
deep fair white sand.

Between the Lyzart and the Stert, come no nearer the land by night then 40.
Fathom. And if you will ancker between those two heads, you shall ancker at 25.
fathom, and be within the stream of the foreland.

Between Joy and the Isle of Basse in the Channel is 58. Fathom, and at the
lands end of England it is 50. fathom deep.

Between the Island of Londey and Silly, it is in the right course 40. fathom
deep.

Item ten leagues to the southeastwardes, from the Island of Saltes is but 20.
fathom, and the ground is small red oz sand.

Item between Milford and the Saltes, in the channel is 40. fathom.

East southeast from the dale of Milford, right against it about a bow shoot
off lies a sonken rock under water.

From the Island of Saltes to the Cape of clear, in the right course is 56.
Fathom, come no near the land in the night than 40. fathom, for then you are
but three leagues from the land.

Item, if you sound being thwart of the cape Clear, and find 80. fathom deep,
and the ground clammy, and small white sand, then if it bee clear weather, you
shall see the Cape out of the top, and that ground and depth is to the
southward of the cape.

Item southward from Dorsey three leagues from the land, it is 70. fathom deep,
and the ground is grey sand mingled with small shells.

The lying of the land of England along the coast.
IN primis the point of the Ness, lies from the point of Dover southwest.

Beachy lies from the point of the Ness West Southwest.

Donnoze in the Isle of Wight lies from Beachy West and by South.

Item the coast along the Isle of Wight, lies West and by north, and the Wight
lies from Nulfers Haven Westwards.

Portland lies from Wight, West Southwest twelve leagues.

The Haven of Dertmouth lies from Wight west south southwest westerly.

The Stert lies from Portland west, and by south 16. leagues.

Plimmouth lies from the Stert, west northwest six or seven leagues.

Dodman lies from Plimmouth, southwest and by west 13, leagues.

The Lyzart lies from the Stert, West and by south 25. leagues.

The lands end of England lies from the Lyzart, UUest northwest westerly 8. or
9. leagues.

Item, it is from the point of Dover to Beachy eighteen leagues.

And it is from Beachy to Donnoze 20. leagues.

From Donnoze to Portland, is 16. leagues.

From Portland to the Stert, is 16. leagues.

From the Stert to the Lyzart, is 22. leagues.

From the Lyzart to silly, is 18. leagues.

And from the Lyzart to the lands end of England is 9. leagues.

From the lands end to ^llie is 8. leagues.

Silly lies from the lands end of England west southwest, and from the Lyzart
silly lies due west.

The lying of the land about the lands ^nd of England, and of the coasts of
Ireland.
IN primis, the Island of Londey, lies from silly northeast and by North, and
are distant 30. leagues.

Waterfoord lies from silly, North and by east 30. leagues,

The haven at Waterfoord lies from the lands end of England, northwest and by
north, 31. leagues.

The haven of Crock lies from silly northwest 35* leagues.

The Cape of Clear lies from the Island of Salties, west southwest 43. leagues,
and between them lies the Old head which lies from waterfoord 24. leagues.

The Island of Salties and the Island of Beumaries or Holihead, lie the one
from the other northeast and by north and southwest and by south, and are
distant 42. leagues.

The Lands of Dorses lies northwest and by west from the cape of Clear, and are
distant 12. leagues.

The Lands of Blaskey lies fro^ the Dorses North and by west, and are distant
19. leagues.

The Cape of Strauen lies from Blaskey North and by west and are distant 8.
leagues.

The courses, the lying of the coasts, and the tides upon the North Coast of
England.


NOte well, that here the flood comes from the Northwards. And first you shall
understand, that the lands end and the Ness, lies North and something to the
Westward, and south something to the east ward, and they are distant two great
kennings, and there a south or North Moon makes a full sea.

Item from the Ness to Orfordnes, the course is north northeast and to the
eastwards, and they are distant two small kennings, and a south or north Moon
makes a full sea.

Item from Orfordnes to Leistowe, the course is north, and they are distant 8.
leagues, and at Leistow a south southeast Moon makes a full Sea.

Item, when you have the foreland southwest of you, and that you are about
eight leagues distant from it, there are banks of 17.20.23. and of 24. fathom,
and the ground is red sand with white shells, and some stony ground likewise.

Item our Ladies bank lies at the head between Calis and Blackness, about 7.10.
or 12. fathom.

Item, hard by Goodwin you shall have 26, fathom, and the ground is gross red
sand.

Item, the west point of the foreland and the Northeast point of Goodwin sands,
lye the one off the other southeast and by east, and northwest and by west, and
are distant 10. Leagues.

Item, the Souther head of the Goodwin and the point are Dover, ^ye the one off
the other southwest and northeast.

Item from Leistowe to Yarmouth, the course is north northwest and they are
distant 2. leagues, and a southeast or north northwest Moon makes a full sea at
Yarmouth.

Item from Yarmouth to Winterton, the course is north northwest, and they are
distant 2. leagues.

From Winterton to the Shield is no direct course, but they are distant 9.
leagues, and there an east or west Moon makes a full sea.

Item from the Shield to Humber, the course is Northwest, and they are distant
three kennings, and a west southwest moon in Humber makes a full sea.

Item, from the Shields to Flamborough head, ye course is Northwest, and they
are distant 30. leagues.

Item, from Humber to Flamborough head the course is North and by west, and
they are distant 12. leagues.

Item, from Flamborough head to Whitby, the course is northwest and by west and
they are distant 10. leagues.

Item from Scarborough to Whitby, the course is north west, and they are
distant 5. leagues.

And between Scarborowe and Whitby, lies Robin Hoods Bay, and a Southwest or a
northeast moon makes a full sea there.

Item from Whitby to Hartlepoole the course is west northwest, and they are
distant eight leagues.

Item, from Hartlepoole to Tinmouth, the course is north northwest, and they
are distant nine leagues, and a southwest or a northwest Moon makes a full sea
there.

Item, all along the North Coast of England, the flood comes in from by north.

Item from Robin Hoods Bay to Tinmouth or Newcastle, the course is northwest.

Item from the Naze of Norway to Skeutnesse, the course is Southeast and
Northwest, and they are distant five kennings. And to know Skeutsnesse it is a
plain low land, and to the eastward of Skeutsnesse, there goes in a deep sound
towards Berghen. And on the east side of the same sound, lies a high round rock
or Cliff dry abou^ water.

A note how you shall know Skeutsnesse.
SKeutnesse is a plain lowe land, and to the the eastward of it doth a sound
run into Berghen. And to the eastward of the said sound, lies a high round rock
or Cliff, and is called the Bosk. And four leagues to the southward of the same
sound, lies another round rock or Cliff in the sea and is called the west
Stone, and between the west stone and the sound lies a little lowe Island which
is called the Whitings eye, and to the westward of Skeutsnesse 4. leagues in
the sea lies a little Island which is called Whitskersen, and shows as it were
two little hills, but it is not high.

Item, skeutnesse and Oldersound lye one from an other, north northwest, and
south southeast, and are distant seven kennings.

Item nine Leagues to the northward of Skeutsnesse lies a high round Cliff
which is called sick, and to the Southward of it, doth go in the Bomwell, a
little by north the Saltfoorde, and to the southward of the Saltfoord it is all
lowe land, and to the northward is high land.

Item between Skeus^nesse and Oldersound, being a pretty way from the land, if
you look on it. It seems as it were all broken land on the south side, and
there are many sounds that go in between Skeutsnesse and Oldersound.

Item to know Oldersound, there is a high cliff yt lies alone, and when you are
a good way off to the northwards, it shows like a sail to the southwards of
you, and seeing it from the westward, it is round.

And from Oldersound to Kin it is four leagues and they lie north and south:
and between those two is a haven but you must either go into Oldersound, or
into Kinsound, and a seaboord Kinsound, a goo^ way from the land, are many high
rocks, And to know Kin, there is a round dry rock^ at the southwest end of
Kinsound, that stands up forked, like a Bishops meter and lies all alone.

Item from Kinsound to Oldersound is three Leagues, and they lie north and
south, and between those two lies a high round sharpe Rock, and there is no
haven between them.

Item, from Oldersound to Stade is eight leagues, and they lie northeast; and
south southwest.

Item you shall understand, that between Oldersound and Stade, is a high land,
and there you may sail all along by the shore, there are no out rocks, whereby
you may take any hurt, for they are all in sight. And there is a good haven in
Oldersound, and by Kinsound is likewise a good haven which is called Ulwatch.

Item from Stade to Floor, or Here, is four leagues and they lie east
northeast, and west southwest, and is all broken Cliffs betwixt.

Item, from Stade to Floe Godsche sound, the course is northeast, and S.w. and
they are distant 7. leag. and Floe watch is a round Cliff and lies alone, and
the East end to look upon, seems a little lower then the west end, and coming
in from the southwards, or by the southwest end, there goes in Floe, and it is
a good haven: and by west off that you shall go into Giske, and that lies in
east and West, and is a very good haven, and between Stade, and Go^ssanne, lies
a little Island which is called the Swine, and is clean ground to sail about.

Now for to know Giske, it is a lowe plain land, and there is church with a
church yard on the land, and before it lies a black rock, and two or three
sonken rocks, whereon the sea doth commonly break.

Item, when as you are three or four leagues West in the sea of Giske, then
doth that land lie along northwest and southeast, almost threescore and seven
leagues, and then more easterly.

Now sailing from Giske, you shall not of long come to any other land, but an
Island called Grip, then when you are thwart of Stames Heft, which lies on the
maine land, for Grip lies a kenning off into the sea, and to the Southward of
Grip is the best going in. And your course from Helen is all easterly, and then
you shall see a high land, lying before you, and that is called Toster Poster.
And when you come by the east land, run all Northeast in, so long till you have
a stream or a tide that meets you, and you have havens on both sides of the
land.

The courses to be kept in sailing on the Coast of Norway.
NOw hee that will sail in at the easter strait or entry by the Naze of norway,
then let him with an east wind sail in hard by ye Naze, and let him take heed
of ye rock called the Bishopbode^, for that lies in the midst of the entry, and
lies aboue water. And when you shall bee within that sound where you shall ride
in, there lies a bom^ within the head of that land: anchor behind that where
you will.

And if it be so, that you will go in at the Easter straight, or entry, then
you shall bear in by Maren, and when you are a little within, there stands a
little Warder which is a Beacon or mark before the entry, which you may see
thorough the midst, and take heed of that shelf, and then go on so in, and let
fall your ancker.

Item, if you will sail in at the Scarsound, you shall know that land by the
Cow and her Calfe, which is a broken land, and there lies a rock without which
is called Mels, and there is an other which is called Sparuay, and then when
you come further inwards as far as the Hart, then you may sail between the two
Beams or marks, or else through between the other shore and the two marks.

Item, if you will sail into Hesnesse, then keep you near to the west shore,
there lies a rock which is called the Cognaile, take good heed of that And also
there lies yet an other which is called the Gray Hollome, you mu^t leave that
on your starboord side: there are two Beacons set up, and when you have brought
those two in one, then are you even thwart the Cognaile: and then as you come
inwards, there lies a Bome, which is a mark to take heed by, on the Larbooad
side: You shall know that land, by that it is a high land, and to the eastwards
lies the Drommelles, and you may well see the Church of Mardowe, and if the
weather be such that you cannot fetch Mardowe, then you shall run three leagues
further into an other haven, which is called Lunge, there lies a round dry rock
before it, and there stands as it were a Beacon with a Barrel on it, keep well
on that shore where the Barrel stands, and at the entering in on the starboord
side, there is a hand which points you to hold off from that place: and also
there is a Bay or Bome, which lies in two fathom and ^. you must take heed of
that place.

Item, if it were so that you would sail into Calfesound, then you shall hale
in by a high land which is called Wing, and there stands five Warlockes or
Beams upon it, the middlemost is the highest, and is on the north shore, and if
you come out of the Sound, you shall know that land by the Distill, and those
are all out-rockes, and there where the five Warlocks or Beacons are upon the
shore where the middlemost is the highest, there you must keep something off
from Distill, for it is not all clear, and keep on so North, or rather to the
westwards, then to the eastwards there abouts, for that shore is clear of
Rocks, and look that you run not upon the Rocks which lie aboue water, behind
which you shall ride.

The courses and d^stances along the coast of Norway.
ITem, wederow and the Scow doe lie the one of the other north and by west, and
south and by east, and are distant thirteen leagues.

Item, from the Naze to Scarsound, the course is east, northeast, and they are
distant four leagues.

Item, from Scarsound to Flecorie, the course is east northeast and they are
distant 5. leagues.

Item from Flecorie to Reeperwicke, the course is East northeast and they are
distant two leagues and a half.

Item from Reeperwicke to Mardowe: the course is northeast, and they are
distant 8. leagues.

Item from Mardow to Longsound, the course is north northeast, and they are
distant 8. leagues.

Item from Longsound to Uerdrro, the course is Northeast, and they are distant
11. leagues.

Item, from the Naze of Norway to Uinesound it is a league, and Uinesound lies
in Northwest.

Item from Uinesound to Scarsound or Westersound, the course is northeast, and
they are distant a league.

Item, from Scar sound, to Hellicksounde it is four leagues.

Item, from Hellicksound to Fleccorie is a league, and then forth two leagues
to Woolfsound.

Item, from Woolfsound to Blindsound, it is a league, and to Hesines three
leagues.

Item, from Hesines to Mardowe, and to Ostersound, three leagues.

Item, from Ostersound to Ioffer land, 3. leagues.

Item, from Ioffer land to Longsound it is a league, and likewise to Larwicke
three leagues.

Item, from Larwicke to saint Ueert, a league.

Item, from Saint Ueert to Miles water, three leagues.

Item, from Miles Water to Uerdero, three leagues.

Item from Uerdero to Roast four leagues, and from thence to Iacksound four
leagues.

Item, from Iacksound to Otturen a league, and Norder Wickholme a league.

Item, from Norder Wickholme to sonder Wickholm four leagues.

Item, from the Uoort to Busher two leagues, and so forth to Malesound a
league.

Item from Malesound to Kirkesound a league, and then forth to Malstrand three
Leagues, and then forth to Calfe sound ^oure Leagues, and there men go into
Koy, and so forth.

From Calfe sound to Reffesand three leagues, and there they sail into Meluos.

Item from Reffesand to Westersound, behind Ning four leagues. From thence to
Weesbergen it is three leagues. And from thence to the Col, sixteen leagues.

The going in by the Westergate, or entry of Flecory.
ITem the wester gate or Wester entry of Flecory doth lie in North northeast,
and the easter gate or entry lies west northwest in And you must leave the
Island, with al the great rocks on ye larbooad side, and keep within the white
Holm, and leave the little black^ rocks on the larbooad side, and there you
shall have eighteen fathom deep, and before the easter gate entry, you may see
the Fox.

Item a league to the Westwards of the Hesnes there lies Hamersound, where are
gray outrocks.

Item, half a league to the Eastwards of Hamersound lies Kerkfort, and there
stands two Beacons or warlocks upon the black rocks, and the one stands on the
Starboord side, and the other on the Larbooad side. And first go in northwards,
and then after m^re easterly, and anchor in thirteen fathom: and towards the
west shore in the fair way, lies a blind rock, which hath four fathom at a full
sea upon it.

Item, half a league to the eastward of Kerkfort, lies Hesnes and if you will
go in there, then keep a good breadth off from the west shore, for there lies a
Rock before it at the entry, which is called the Cognaile, and there is another
rock called Gray Hollome: you shall leave those on the starboord side, and
there stands two Mastes set up upon it, and when you have brought these two
Mastes in one, then are you thwart of the Cognaile. And as you come inwards,
there lies a dry rock on the Larbooad side. And you shall know that land, for
that it is a high land and the Drommelles are from you, north north-west, and
to the westwards are gray rocks* and to the eastwards are round rocks: and hard
by the sea side there stands a white church, which you cannot see unless you be
hard by it.

Item, when the Drommelles lye northwest of you, then are you open of Mardow,
and the east end of the uttermost Mainholme and that Island, lies north and by
west, and south and by east, and you must lye northwest in, if you will go
clear of them.

A league to the eastwards of Mardow^, lies Ossenfort, and a league to the east
wards of Ossenfort lies Fuert: and when the Drommell^s lye west from you there
lies Lunge, and before it lies a round rock, and there stands a Beacon or mark
upon it with a Barrel, keep you near by the land whereon the Ba^rell stands.
And there stands a hand to the Starboord side of the entry, and that hand
points, that there lies a blind rock, on which is but eleven foot water.

Item, the west Stanffort, and the easter Risen, lye three leagues to the
Westwards of Iofferland, and one of them goes North in, and the other goes west
in.

Item, a little to the Westwards of Iofferland lies the Kill.

Item, hee that will sail into the Kill, let him keep the high hill that lies
next unto Iofferland, alone within the land to the west of Iofferland, and when
you have the Hill Northwest and by west from you, then you are open before the
Kill. And upon the West shore stands a Beacon, and it is a white point.

Item, between Iofferland and Langsound, doth lie Abbisuert, by great steep
rough rocks.

Hee that will sail into Langsound, hee must go North Northeast in, from the
easter out Scarre of Iofferland, and these great out Rocks of the Ness, and
then North northwest goes with the high rough round Rock, where the bars lies
before, so al is north north west in.

From Uerdro to Soenwater, the course is north and by west, and thence to Rog
North north east, and if you will ancker by Rog by east, it is a should sandy
Bay. And you may likewise sail through between Rog and the Calfe. And if you
will ancker under Fletto, then go without the two small Rocks.

Item the course from Uerdero to Elffange is Northeast and by north, and that
goes within the out Rocks, which lie within the Sisters a seaboord Rog, and
keeping so right against the land you shall see a great gray Rock, leave that
on your Larbooad side, and there within lye small Rocks, leave those on the
Starboord side, and go about by the west shore, then are you right in the
narrowest of the gate or entry, and there is good ground to ancker in, and
within it is flat and soft ground.

Item from Uerdero to the Graswicke within the Sisters, the course is
northeast, and leave the sharpe point on your Larbooad side, there is good
anckering, and within lies a round Rock, you may go on either side of it, and
to the northwards of that rock, stands a great warleeke, and there is likewise
good anckering, and room for a great fleet of ships, which tarry for a wind,
and if you will go in, then go along by the west shore, and there within lies
likewise a round rock, leave that on your stereboord side, and there you may
ride if you will, and the first of the entry lies in northwards, and after
about the Island north northeast, and then north northwest in and about the
west shore.

Item, a good way without the Sisters lies a shippell which is likewise a good
hard haven.

Item, Malstrand lies from the scow East northeast, if you will sail in there,
you shall see a great long Hill, keep that same hill to the east northeast from
you, and so you shall leave the Pater Nosters on the Larbooad side, and then
you may see Malstrand lying before you where upon the great Beacon or UUarlocke
is standing.

Item eight leagues to the eastwards of Malstrand lies UUinne, which is a long
Rock, and is small to be known, for there lies at the end of it small Rocks,
like as they were in three parts, and that lies east and west from the scow.

Item, three leagues by east of UUinne, lies Konsbacks and Malesound, and
Nidinck, lying the one of the other Northeast and south west, and Malesound is
a round Island, and you may sail round about it at five, six, seven or eight
fathom. And west northwest from Malesound lies a sonken rock a small base shot
from it: and then as far from that lies another little Rock in sight aboue
water, and there stands a Warder or mark upon it at the west northwest end. And
further upon the maine land stands two warders or marks, those are great ones,
and stand upon the sea side, either of them upon an out rock a little a sunder,
and there goes in a little haven between the warders: and the same haven lies
east northeast from Malesound and along by the lowe point, you shall see
Konsback lying northwards from you, and there it is very shallow, and you may
well pass through between Nidincke and the maine land, it is all fair ground
there, and something shallow.

Item, the Naze of Norway lies from the Scow west and they are distant 32.
leagues.

Item, Uerdero lies from the ^caw, North northwest and they are distant 13.
leagues.

Item, Malestrand lies from the Scow East northeast, and they are distant 13.
leagues.

Nidincke lies from Watersbergen southeast and they are distant five leagues.

Item Watersbergen lies from the Cole south and by east, and they are distant
twelve leagues.

Item, Watersbergen shows as though it were an out rock, and the land to the
eastwards from Watersbergen is all plain whole land, and Werstwards it is
altogether rocky.

Item Breto is a high round hill, and lies by Malestrand and westwards from
Breto lies a long high hill.

Item, when as Breto lies East northeast of you, then are you right before
Malestrand.

Item, Nidincke is a lowe plain out Rock, and lies a league from the shore, and
you may sail round about it.

Item, the Scow Riff and the Trendelles, lie the one from the other southeast
and Northwest, and are distant 9. leagues.

Item, the Trendelles and Anold Riff lye the one from the other southeast and
by south, and Northwest and by North and are distant 11. leagues.

Item Anold Riff and the Cole, lye one from the other, next hand southeast and
northwest, and are distant twelve leagues.

Item the Trendelles lies Northeast, something northerly from the Wend of
Lesol^e, about three small leagues from the shore, and lies along into the sea,
hard by the Trendelles: it is four fathom deep, and on the Trendele it it is
but a fathom and a half, and within them it is five fathom deep or there
abouts.

Item the Scow Riff and the Trendelles, lye the one from the other southeast
and northwest, and are distant 9 leagues.

Item, the Scow and Watersbergen, lye one off an other East Southeast, and West
northwest, and they are distant 16. leagues.

Item, when the Scow bears west and by south from you, and that you are a great
league and more from the land, there you shall have 37. fathom, come no nearer
to the scow in the night, then 13. or 14. fathom, and especially when you are
come from the westwards.

Item when you are south southwest from the point of the Scow, and that you are
a great league from it, you shall have ground there at 38. fathom.

Item, when you have the Scow Northwest, or thereabouts from you, and you are a
league from the shore, then you shall have 17 or 18. fathom.

Item between Anold and Waesbergen, it is in the channel 22. fathom deep.

Item from Lesold to Waesberghen, the course is East, and when you are east
from Lesold so far as you can well see it off the Ships Hatches, then shall you
have no ground in 40. fathom.

Item between the Scow and Lesolde it is twenty fathom deep and soft ground,
even hard to the Coast of Norway.

Item between the Scow and Lesolde is no hard grou^d, but that you have about
Yotland side, and that is hard sandy ground, and between Lesolde and Anold it
is al hard ground.

Item, by Waesbergen lies a Flat of seventeen Fathom deep.

Item from Flastenbrowe lies a Flat of ^welue fathom deep along to Brunt
Holland.

Item, there lies a bank^ between Anold and Cole of seven fathom, and sometimes
the stream runs round^ about and breaks upon it.

Between Anold and Zealand lies an Island, which you may sail round about, and
ride on any side of it, and the same lies hath by Zealand, and there lies out a
riff from it towards Zealand, and towards Zealand it is hard, and towards
Norway soft, and also there lies another riff off it towards the Belt, and
those banks are very steep too, and the Island is called Sedero.

Item, Northeast and by north, of the norwest end of the Cole, lies an Island
called Wede^or, hee that will ride within that Island, let him anchor against
the white church at 7. fathom or thereabouts. It is there a flat soft-ground,
you may sail round about it, Norwardes or southwards whethr you will.

From Anold to Waesbergen, the course is Northwest and they are distant 9.
leagues.

Item, when Anold is south southwest from you, there is the north end deep, and
you may sail to the westward of the riff 18 fathom all along to the sound. And
if you come out of the sound with a scant wind, that you can not keep your
course, or near the land, then ye may ride under Anold.

Between Anold and Lesold is 7. fathom deep, and you may sail through that Says
into the Belt.

Under the North end of Anold you may ride at 10. or 11 fathom, and you must go
room of the riff, for to go further in.

He that will sail into Waesbergen, let him bring the uttermost Buy to the
Northwards of the Castle, and so go on north northeast, and take good heed, for
there lies a great Rock, even a little under the water, and you must leave that
on your starreboorde side, and run so in, till you come against the Castle, and
come thereto an anchor at four fathom or there abouts.

Item, Lesold lies along south and north, and on the south end stands a long
flat Church, and there lies a riff of a good half League, and you must sail
without that riff in five or six fathom, for it is shallow, and bear Eastward
off. And when you are out of the sound, you may then boldly sail on, and then
you must bear out Eastward again at five fathom, until you have brought the
south end to the westward of you, and then you shall have there 7. fathom.

Item North and by east from Nidiucke, lies an Land which is called Malesound,
you may ride within that yland, for behind it li^s a good haven, which is
called Monstersond, and lies North and north northeast in. And to the west
northwestwardes, lies a rock about two or three bowshootes off And there stands
a warder or Beacon upon it, and you may sail round about these two Lands before
named.

Item, about 12. leagues south west from the Naze, lies a bank of 14. fathom
deep, and the ground is gross red sand.

The courses from the Swine Eastward.
ITem note that Walgheren and Skentinesse, lye the one from the other, south
and north, and are distant a hundred thirty and eight leagues.

Item Walgheren and the Naze, lye the one from the other south and by west, and
North and by east, and are distant 10 leagues.

Item the Naze and Borneriffe lye one from the other south and North, and are
distant 9^ leagues.

Item the Naze and the Fred lie the one from the other east northeast, and west
southwest distant 108. leagues.

Item the Naze and the sands before Yarmouth lye the one from the other north
northeast, and south southwest and are distant 112. leagues.

Item the Naze and the Holmes, lies one from the other Southeast and by south,
and northwest and by north, and are distant 18. or 19. leagues.

Gotsgesand lies from Walgheren northeast, a little northerly and they are
distant 16. leagues.

Holland lies along north northeast, and south southwest, and he that will sail
from Gotsgesand without the Haeken, he must go north and by east, and it is
from Gotsgesand to hacken 2^ leagues.

Item, when a man coming out of the Sea doth fall with holland so as he may see
the land, he shall know it by two steeples which stand both vp^n one Church
which is called S. Albert^: and you may be bold to borough by that land in
eight fathom, so that you keep your self as you may get off again with a
northwest wind, for that shore is flat far of from the land.

From the Heathen to Borneriff, the course is northeast, and they are distant
12. leagues.

Wangeroge lies from Borneriffe east northeast, and is distant from it 35.
leagues.



Holy land lies from Wangeroge North and by east, and they are 9. leagues.

Item, the riff lies westward into the Sea f^om Yotland, and if ye bee in 20.
Fathom of the riff, then are you to the southwards of Naze 20. leagues off.

Bouenbergen lies from Holy land North and by west, and is distant from it 51.
leagues.

From Bouenbergen to the Holmes, the course is northeast, and the distance ten
leagues.

Bouenbergen is a long flat hill, and on the south end of it stands a st^eple,
and to the northwards at the north end stands likewise a high steeple, and it
is al high rough sandhilles along towards the Holmes, and that shore lies north
northeast along.

The riff or sand lies out between Bouenbergen and the Holmes west into the
sea.

It^m, from the Holmes to Robs^ot, the course is northeast, and they are
distant 8. leagues.

Item, at the west end of Robsnot, lies a bank of 12 or 13 fathom deep which
lies 3. league a from the shore.

Item, your course from harts Hals^ to the Scow, is east northeast, and they
are distant 8. leagues.

Item, Trendell and Scaghen riff lye one from an other southeast and northwest,
and are distant 8. leagues.

Item, from Robsnot, is four Leagues to Harts Halse, and Harts Halse lies of it
northeast and by east.

From Harts Halse to the Scow is 8 leagues.

Item, the Scow is a low sandy Land, and Lacklie is a high land, and when you
come from by west, you may see it over the Scow.

Item, the Scow riff lies east northeast into the sea, a great half league.

Item, a great league to the northeastwardes from the west end of Lesold, lies
the grounds or flats of the Trendelles, and in some places they are not aboue a
fathom and a half deep.

Item, when you have Leisold West from you, and that you may see it out of the
waste of the ship, you shall have no ground at 40. fathom.

Lessold is a plain low Island, and Anold is a ragg^d or knotty Island, and the
Riff lies a great way off.

The Cole is a high land, and shows it self in three knobs.

How to sail from sundry places to the Scow.
ITem, he that is ^ue leagues to the northwards of Callis and will sail in at
the ^, let him go North northeast, something more north^ ^ h^ come in twenty
Fathom of the Riff, which is an hundred and eighteen leagues off and the course
is north ^ and something easterly to Holme, and then north and northeast to the
Scow.

From the Scow ^, southeast and by east, and distant 8. leagues, and th^ ^ to
the east wards of the Trendelles.

From Lesold to Anold southeast, distant 8. leagues.

From Anold ri^e to the Cole, south southeast twelve leagues.

Item, when you have the ^ a great half League to the northeast of you, there
it is ^5. Fathom deep or thereabout. And between ^ C^le and Zealand it i^ 14.
or 15. Fathom deep, and ^ of veale^ in the night any nearer Zealand then twelve
fathom. And between Anold Riff and the Cole, there is 20 and ^ fathom deep.

Item, the South ^ lies a good way within the Cole and when you will sail into
the sound, then keep the castle of Elsenbrowe without the land, and then you
can take no harm there.

Laysand lies something to the northward of Olsenure, on the west side of the
sound, ^ome no nearer there then 7. fathom, and you may sail in less.

Item the Cole and Elsenure lye five leagues asunder, and the course lies from
Draker, to Faste^ borne Riff south.

From Elsenure to Rerichol, the course is south and by east, and they are
distant 5. leagues.

From Draker to Fasterborne riff, the course is south and by west. And when you
can not see between the Castle of Fasterborne and the rhurch* then are you upon
the shal^owest of the riff.

Item, Fasterborne and the Moons lye the one off the other, south and by west,
and north and by east.

Item, between the Moons and Fasterborne, it is in the channel 15 or 16. fathom
d^e or thereabouts.

Item, between Steeden and Fasterborne are twelve fathom deep in the channel
and by Fasterborne it is shallow, and by Steeden it is thirteen or fourteen
Fathom deep.

Item, the Moons and Steeden, lye the one from the other southeast and by south
and Northwest and by north, and they are distant 3. great leagues.

Item, Fasterborne and I^smount ly^ one from an other south east and northwest,
and ^ distant 16. leagues.

Item, Iasmount and Whitmount lye one of an other east southeast and west
northw^st, and are distant 3. great leagues.

Item, Whitemount and Dorn^hes lye one off another south and by west, and north
and by east, and are distant 4. leagues.

Item Iasmount and the Moons lye one from another southeast and by east, and
northwest, and by west, and are distant 9 leagues.

Item, Whitmount and Brenth^llom lye one from an other, southwest and bywest,
and northeast, and by east, and are distant 19. leagues.

Item, Bronthollom and Bl^ckside lye one of another east and by north, and West
and by south, and are distant 9. leagues.

The courses to Misloude and Gripewood.
ITem, the course from Fasterborne to Iasmount lies southeast, and they are
distant 16. leagues.

Item from Iasmount to Peered, the course is south southeast, and the distance
is 3. great leagues.

Item, from the Peered too the new Deep, the course is south and westerly, and
the distance is 3. leagues.

Item, he that will ride by Whitmount, he may sail into the Wick as far as he
will, for it is there all fair ground: when as you are a long league from the
shore, in 14 or 15. Fathom, there is all good fast ground, and there you are
defended from a Northwest, or North Norwest wind, but at 7.8. or 9. fathom
towards the land it is all foul stony great.

Item, if you do ancker at Iasmo^nt very near to it it is stony ground, but if
you do ancker at 14. fathom, there it is good chackie or clay ground.

The courses through the flats or grounds which are in the sounds.
First, for the course through the grounds or flats, from Fasterborne riff to
Drakor, you must sail North and by east, and hard by Drakor it is 5. fathom
deep, and a little off there abouts is the shallowest of that deep, and there
lies the second Tun or Buy. Kasperkury lies in 6. Fathom or thereabouts, and
hard by it, it is 7. or 8. fathom deep.

Now, the Marks for too bring the Castle at Copenpen haven, and the sharpe
steeple in one and go directly North and by west to the middle Tun or Buy
according as the wind or stream do serve, you may well lie off and on under the
Cotholme. The middle mark is the Southerliest Mill by South Copen haven.

Then soorth to the thi^d Tun or Buy, the course is North northwest and there
lies a high hillock, by West of other three hillocks, that b^ing ^ught by North
the town, next to Copen haven, there you shall have ten or eleven fat^am. And
then going forth north and by east to Elsenure, there you shall have, ^tr^ight
as soon^ as you are past the buy, 7.8. or 9. fathom.

The course from E^senure to Draker.
THe right course from Elsenure, to th^ grounds or stat^, thwart Copen haven
and Draker is south and by east, and the distanc^ is 8. leagues.

Then forth from Draker to Steeden, the course is South and by west, the
distance five leagues. And between Steeden and Fasterborne, it is 10 or 11.
fathom deep, and by Steeden you have deep water.

Item, the Moons and Steeden lies Southeast and by south, and northeast and by
north, distant four leagues.

Item, in the channel between the Moons and Fastenbrowit is 15. or 16. fathom
deep.

Item, the Moons and I^smount lye one of another, southeast and by east, and
northwest and by west, and are distant nine leagues.

Item, Iasmount and Whitmount lye one off an other East southeast, and West
northwest, and are distant three leagues.

Item Whitmount and Dorrembos lye one from an other southwest and by west, and
northeast and by east, and are distant 4. leagues.

Item, Whitmount and Bronthollem, lye the one from the other northeast and
byeast, and southwest and bywest, and are distant 12 leagues.

The courses from Fasterborne to Dank.
First, from Fasterborne to Bront Hollom, the course is East and by south, and
they are distant 21. leagues, and Bront Hollom lies along east southeast.

Item your course from Bront Hollom to Recall, is east and by north, and the
distance 24. leagues.

Item, the course from the Recall to the Rose head, is east northeast, and they
are distant 16. leagues.

Item, from the Rose-head to Externes, the course is east southeast, and they
are distant four leagues.

Item, from Externes to Uernoord, the course is southeast and they are distant
one league.

Item from the ^rnoord to the Heel is south southeast and they are distant one
league.

Item the course from the Heel to the Wissell, is south and by west, and they
are distant five leagues.

Item, from the Nierinck of Dank to the Memell, the land lies along northeast,
and south southwest.

Item Lobsted is a Castle, and stands upon a high hill, and lies three leagues
to the eastwards of Quinshorowe and there is likewise a Mill by it.

Item the land of Lobsted doth lie along to Dermemble north northeast, and
south southwest, and they are distant the one from the other 25. leagues.

Item from Dermemble to Seuenbergen, the land lies north north west, and south
southeast, and they are distant twelve leagues.

Item, from Seuenbergen to Leserort, the land lies north and by east, and south
and by west, and they are distant 11. leagues.

Item, Dermemble and Leserort, are distant twentie-two leagues.

The courses and distances along the coast of Pomerland.
IN primis, fro^ the Rose head to Seruenis head, it is four^ leagues, and from
thence to Wolnesacke other 4 leagues, and then so Lida a league, and at Lida is
but five foot water.

And then from Lida to the Recall, you have 7. leagues and from Recall to
Granshood four leagues, and then forwards is a deep bay into Iasmount.

Item, from Granshood to Siuolde, is three leagues, and there comes out a small
River which is called Wiper.

Item, from Riuoold to Colbergen is 9, Leagues, and there comes likewise a
small river out.

Item, Colbergen and Iasmount lye East and west, the one from the other, and
are distant 19. leagues.

Item, the course between Iasmount and Granshood is east northeast and west
south west.

Item, the coast of Pomerland lies along west Southwest, and east northeast.

The courses to sail to Revel.
ITem from Fosterbo^ne Riff, to go by the North side of Bronthollome the course
is east, and to the Northwards and are distant 20. leagues.

Item, from Bronthollome to go to the southwards of the Goteland, the course is
northeast, and they are distant 47. leagues.

Item from Howbrough in Goteland, to Easter Gore, the course is Northeast and
something to the Northwards and they are distant 14. leagues.

Item, from Easter Gore to Dagerort the course is northeast northerly, and they
are distant 37. leagues, then from Dagerort to Sipiernes it is 7. leagues
northeast and by east.

But take deep of Sipernes. And then your course from Sipernes to UUodhollome,
is likewise northeast and by east and they are distant 9. leagues.

Item, UUodhollome is a little lowe Island, and lies two leagues from the maine
land.

Item, from Wodhollom to Rog the course is east northeast, and rather more
easterly, and they are distant 6 leagues.

Item from Rog to Nargen, the course is east northeast rather to the eastwards,
and they are distant six leagues, and you must have Nargen on your Larbooad
side.

Item, from Naruen to the Buy, you must go east a great league, and ynu shall
have Buy on your steareboord side,

Item, you must go from the Buy to Revel south, and something to the east
wards, and they are three leagues distant.

How Dagerort is known.
THe b^st knowledge is this: the governors of r^uel have made a high Tower or
steeple* upon Dagerort without any church to it,

Item Dagerort and Hontsord lye the one from the other south southeast, and
north northwest, and are distant eight leagues.

Item, between Dagerort and Hontsord is a great gulf or bay, and the same is
called Hondeswicke.

The courses from Dagerort to Derwinda.
THe course from Dagerort to Derwinda, is north and by west, and south and by
east, and they are distant 14. leagues.

Item, from Derwinda to Seuenberghen, the land lies along south by and by west,
and north and by east, and they are distant 32. leagues.

The course from the Rose-head to Derwinda.
DErwinda is a Castle, and there are three small Towers upon it, one stands in
the middle of the Castle and that is the highest, and the Castle stands in
Coreland.

Item the course from the Rosehead to Derwinda, is Northeast and by north, and
they are distant threescore and three leagues.

The thwart courses from Coreland to Goteland.
FIrst Derwinda and Eastergore lye one from another East and UUest, and they
are distant eight and twenty leagues.

Item, Derwinda and Howbrough which is the southwest end of Goteland, lye one
from an other East northeast, and UUest Southwest, and they are distant 44.
leagues.

Item, the southwest end of Goteland and the Heel, lye one from another South
and North, and are distant nine and forty leagues.

The course from the Rose-head to Quinsbrow.
THe course from the Rose-head to Quinsbrowe, is east and by south, and they
are distant 18. leagues.

Item the Heel and the UUissell of Dank, lye the one from the other South and
by west, and North and by East and are distant 5. leagues.

The course from Bronthollom to Rye.
ITem the course from Bronthollome to Derwinda is Northeast and by ^ast, and
they are distant 77. leagues.

Leserort.
Derwinda.
Bacouen.

Item, the course from Derwinda to Leserort is Northeast and by north, and they
are distant 4. leagues.



Item, the course from Leserort to Domesnes, is East northeast, and the
distance 13. leagues.

Item and if you doe not sound, it is dangerous on Corland side, therefore you
must go ye way by your lead. And take good heed of Oessell side, for that is
stony ground.

Item, you may borrow by Leserort in 4.5. or 6. fathom without danger, and the
ground is red sand, and when you come to 13. or 14. fathom, then go northeast
and by east with Domesnes.

Item, the course from Domesnes to Rye is southeast, and something more
easterly, and the distance 21. leagues.

Item, between Coreland and Oessell, it is 15 or 16. fathom deep. And thwart of
the church of Oessel lies a riff two leagues off from the shore, and the same
riff is called Swalueroort, you must take heed you come no nearer that riff
then seven Fathom.

Item between Domesnes and Oessell it is 20. fathom and is fast or hard ground.

Item hee that will ride under Oessell for a Westerly wind, let him bear in
till he come in seven Fathom or thereabout, and there hee shall have good clean
ground and good Ankerholde. And ye shall keep the Church of Oessell half a
league from you, west and by north or therabouts. And there you shall bee well
for a we^t southwest wind. And the point of Oessel by west the church whereon
the houses stand, that shall bear^ w^st from you. And the Riff lies thwart off
from the church two leagues, south and by west into the sea, and in some places
it is dry nigh to the land. Take heed therefore you come no nearer the out side
of that riff then 8. fatha^, for it is very vne^en ground and stony. And when
you are at anchor in the road at Oessel, then have you the point of Domesnes,
southeast from you or thereabout, and distant three great leagues.

Also the land along from Derwinda to the Seuenbergen lies south and by west,
and north and by east, and they are distant 11. leagues.

The thwart course^ of Domesnes, Round, and Oes^ell.
ITem Domesnes is a a Riff, and lies a great League from the land East
Northeast into the sea, from the point.

Item, Domesnes and Round lie one from an other east and by north, and West and
by south, and are distant right leagues.

Item, Round and Ambroke lie the one from the other north west and by west, and
southeast and by east, and are distant 8. leagues. And Ambroke is a little
Island, and lies a league from Oessell and the ground about it is foul stony
ground.

Also the Round and Rye lye one off another, southeast and northwest, and are
distant 16. leagues.

Also Round is an Island, and is in compass a great league about, and you may
sail round about it without danger, keeping you in five fathom and a half.

Also hee that will ride by the northeast point of Round: let him anchor
against the Chapel in 5. Fath. it is al clean ground there. And on the west
southwest side of Round, it is a fair flat land.

Now follows the course from Round to ^.
FIrst, from Round to Kin, the course is ^ast northeast, and they are distant
22. leagues.

Also from Kin to Serkhollome, and from thence to Porno, the course is northwe^
and by north, and the distance ^ight leagues, an^ Porno lies in the Bay of Rios
bottom.

Item, Kin, Serkhollome, and Magno, are three Lands, and these you must leave
all on larboordside, when you sail into Porno, and at Pa^no stan^es a sharpe
steeple.

Also Kin is a lower ragge^ Island, about two leagues of length, and there is
f^ule ground about it.

Item, it is broad between Corela^d and Kin, four^ leagues.

Also Coreland ^ is a g^od feet shore, and between Corland and Kin it is 10.
fathom deep, and between Serkhollom and Corland is five fathom deep, and
between that and Porno, now and then less water: to wit, 4. fathom and three
fathom.

Porno and Ry^ doe lie the one from the other south an^ by west, and north and
by east, and they are distant nineteen leagues.

Item, the depth at Porno ^s one fathom and a quarter.

Now you must take heed that by night you come no nearer to Domesnes, then 15.
fathom, and hard by the uttermost part of the Riff it is 17. fathom deep, and
at the uttermost parts of Domesnes and Round, it is 24. fathom deep.

Also Domesnes and round lye the one from the other east and by north, and west
and by south, distant eight leagues.

The course^ bac^e again from Revel to D^gerort.
IN primis, from Nargen to Sipernesse, the course is west ^outhwest, and
something more southerly, and they are dis^ant 21. leagues.

Item, the course from Sipernesse to Dageroort, is southeast and by south, and
they are distant 6. leagues.

Item, the course from Dagerort to Eastergor, is southwest and they are distant
19. leagues. And Eastergor, lies by the south side of Gotland near the midst of
it, or rathe^ nearest toward the east end. Gotland is a good road for such as
are bound either eastward or Westward, you may save in all places round about
that Island.

Item, from Eastergor to Bron^hollom, ^our course is southwest, and they are
distant 6. leagues.

Item, Westergore lye^ in the Northside of Gotland by Wesbuy.

The course that is to be kept in saylin^ from Dagerort, to go about by the
North part of Gotland to Bronthollom.
FIrst the course from Dageroort to Gotsgesand, is southwest and by west, and
^om^what westerly, and they are distant 25. leagues.

Item, from Gotsgesand to Karelse your course is southwest and by south, and
they are dis^ant 28, leagues.

Item, from Karelse to the south point of Yolland your course is south
southwest, and they are distant eight and twenty leagues.

Item, the course from the southernmost point of Yolland to Bronthollom, is
southwest, and something more southerly, and they are distant 19. leagues. And
from that south point of Yolland, lies out a Riff into ye sea, a little league
from the shore.

Item, it is from Revel to Narghen 4. leagues.

Item, from Narghen to Surpeis 1. league.

Item, from Surpe to Rog is three leagues.

Item, from Rog to Woodhollom, is 4. great leagues.

Woodhollom is a little lowe Island, and lies a league and a half from the
maine land.

Item from Woodhollom to Sipernesse it is 8. leagues.

Sipernesse is a high land, and there lies out a Riff from the land half a
league into the Sea, and on the east side it is flat, but on the west side it
is deep, and is a sandy ground.

The course from Dagerort about by the north side of Goteland.
FRom Dagerort to Gotsgesand, the course is southwest and by west and they are
distant 24. leagues.

Gotsgesand is a little Island and full of trees, and there is no h^bitation
upon it, and there you may choose your made where you will under the land, for
it is all clean ground and fair white sand round about that Island. It lies
north northeast from the ^astermoste point of Goteland which is called Fero,
about 4. leagues off.

Item, there lies a Riff of sand out from that point of Fero, a great league
from the land, and the same Riff is called Salve Ontein^, and it is all shingle
stones, and lies out from the land North and by east into the sea.

Item the point of Fero and Eastergore doe lye the one from the other south and
by west southerly, and north and by east northerly, and are distant 9. leagues.

The depths and soundings about Goteland and Yolland.
BE^weene Goteland and Yolland is very uncertain ^ound^ng, for in some place
you shall have 33. Fathom and in some other place twenty two fathom, and the
ground black gritty stones, and sometime stones as great as poison which are
black and earthy* and sometime you shall have 19. fathom and all black stony
gro^nd.

And when the souther Norton bears West off f^om you, and that you are three
Leagues or thereabouts from the land, there you shall have hard ground, and 28,
or 29 fathom deep.

Item, when as you are two leagues to the westwards of Eastergore, and three
leagues or thereabouts from the land, you shall have rough ground, and one and
thirty fathom deep.

Also when you are Northwest, or Northwest and by north from Howbrough, which
is the southwest point of Goteland three leagues from the shore, you shall have
gross Gravely Sand, mingled with some black stones as great as beans.

Also when the Chapel of Souther Norton doth lye North Northwest, or more
Northerly from you a league from the shore, you shall have there thirteen
fathom deep.

Also when you are North Northeast, or thereaboute^ from Howbrough 6 leagues
from the Land, you shall hau^ fifteen^ Fathom, and ^onie ground. And when you
are Southwest of Howbrough, two leagues from the land, you shall have twenty
two Fathom, and likewise gross stony ground.

Item, when Souther Norton bears West Northwest from you, and you are two
Leagues off in the Sea, you shall have there one and thirty fathom, and hard
stony ground.

Also when you are past souther Norton, and are in the fair way about Clippen,
there you shall have hard Slymish ground, and 39. fathom deep.

Also from Karelse to the South end of Yolland, your course is south southwest,
and they are distant seven and twenty Leagues.

Item, the course from the South end of Yolland to Bronthollom is southwest and
by south and they are distant 18, leagues.

Item, Yolland is 18. or 19. leagues long, and a great League broad, and upon
Yolland all the steeples are flat and Yollands south coast lies along North and
by east and south and by west.

Item, from the south point of Yolland, there lies out a shrord stony riff,
which is called Souther Norton, and lies out a league from the shore.

Also by west Yolland goes in Cormersound, and that way you may sail to Stoke
holme, and by east Yolland it is foul stony ground.

Also seven leagues from Yolland West southwest, lies an Island which is called
Clippe^, you may sail round about that Island, and it lies north northeast from
Bronthollom, and is distant 16. leagues.

Item, Bronthollom and the Island called Hanno, lye the one from the other,
south and by west, and north and by east, and they are distant 11. leagues.
Hanno is a high round Island, and you may ride there if you will, and the land
lies from Hanno to Blacksit south southwest.

Also the Castle of Bronthollome and the Earthollome, lye the one from the
other west and by south, and east and by north, and are distant 3. leagues.

Item, the Earthollome and the south end of Bronthollom, doe lie the one from
the other South and by east, and north and by west, and are distant 3. great
leagues. And in the Earthollom there goes in a little sound* which is four
fathom deep. This Island is two great leagues from Bronthollom.

Item, southwest and by south from Bronthollom, nine or ten leagues off from
the shore, lies a Riff called the Browers Riff, which is a bank, and there is
five fathom upon it, and it lies along southeast and northwest.

Also you may sail round about Bronthollom without danger, keeping 12. fathom.

A note for riding under Gotel^nd.
FIrst you shall understand that great K^rle and little Karl are two small high
rocky Lands which do^ lye v^r^e near the one to the other, and they lie to ^he
North^wards of the wes^ part of Goteland hard by it: and ^or such as are bound
westwards, is a good road under litt^ Karl which lies next unto Goteland, and
all is clean ground round about. But great Karl is not clean ground neither on
the northwest side, nor southeast side.

Item, between great Karl and little Karl, it is 13. or 14. fathom deep.

Item, Karlesse and Wisbuy lye the one from the other northeast and southwest,
and are distant 7. leagues.

Item, between Karlesse and Wisbuys lies Westergore.

Item take heed you come not any nearer great Karl on the other side of it,
than 11. or 12. fathom.

Item whosoever will sail into Eastergore, coming from by west, let him pass by
the first point and bear in to the other steep point, and anchor there in 7. or
8. fathom there you shall have clean ground, and between the Island and the
Maineland it is 11. fathom deep, and 16. ^atham hard by the land.

Item a little league by west Eastergore lies likewise a good haven and it is
called Sandwicke, and there stands a Chapel hard by the shore side, and five
leagues from thence to the west wards lies another haven which is called
Nerwicke, and is five fathom deep, and so likewise other more, as Buiswige, and
Heilicholme, and Farasound, and the Island of Eastergore, and doe lie the one
off the other south and by west, and north and by east, and are distant 9. or
10. leagues.

Item, between Howbrough and Eastergore, lies a bank of 24. fathom, gross red
stony sand, and from that bank you cannot see the land of Goteland out of the
top. And you have also to the Eastw^rd thereby, an other bank of thirteen or
fourteen fathom, and the ground is gray or whitish sand, and when ^ou are over
that, you shall not have ground at forty f^tham.

The courses from Earthollom to Derwinda.
ITem the course from Earthollom to Dermemel is east northeast and they are
distant 63. leagues.

Item* when the Rosehead bears southeast from you, and that you are four
leagues from it, you shall have there twenty six fathom, and the ground red
stones like the riff sand.

Item when the Rose-head lies south southeast of you, being a league from it,
there you shall find fourteen or fifteen fathom, and it is white sandy ground.

Item, the Rose-head and Goteland lye one from an other south and North, and
are distant 38 leagues.

Item, if you come from Bronthollom being bound for Dank, and have 30. fathom
deep, you shall scant see the land out of the top, and the land is great white
sand.

Item, when the Rose-he^d bears south southeast from you, then it seems like a
saddle with two Hillocks.

Item, when the Rose-head bears south sout^west of you, and that you are a
little leagu^ off, there the g^ound is gross white sand, and ye shall have
about 30. fathom deep.

Item, when as the Rose-head bears West from you, and that you are a small
le^gue from the L^nd, there you shall have small white sand, and 15. or 16.
fathom deep.

Item when you are bet^eene the Rose head and the Heel, and the East of the
Heel, about half a league f^om the land there you shall find 33. fathom and a
white sandy ground.

And before the Heel in the road, you shall have 25. f^tham deep, and black
sandy ground.

Grounds and Depths.
ITem, the bank that is at the easter end, lying northwe^ from the Rock, and
the wester end of the bank that lies northwest fro^ Harlem, hath a swash in the
midst of the bank, in which is 12.14.16. or 17. fathom, and whe^ you are at the
broadest, there is 14. fathom, and then you have the Fly east southeast from
you.

The depth and ground thwart of Ameland.
FIrst at 20. fathom ye shall have gross red sand mingled with some black sand,
and shelly. And to the southward of that in 15. fathom, there you shall have
small sand with shells. And for the space of the running of 4. or 5. glasses,
continually ye shall have 16. Fathom, and the ground all small sand, and that
is the bank or flats of Ameland.

Item, in 24. or 26. fathom North from the Skellings, there you shall have fine
white sand.

Item, upon the Riff from three and thirty fathom to four and twenty. And from
three and twenty to six and twenty fathom, the ground is all white sand, and
continues so till the last end of four and twenty fathom, and twenty Fathom.
And from twenty to seventeen fathom is all gross stony sand: and that is about
Bortkum, and where white shells are mingled withal, and is thwart of the
Skellings.

Item, at 18. fathom of the Skellings, the ground is white sand mingled with
black sand.

Item, the ground thwart of the Fly Island is whit^ sand, and mingled with some
red Sand, and redd^ shells.

Item, at 18. fathom by the east end of the Skeilinges, the ground is fine
white sand mingled with black seeds, and small long white things like Needless.

Item, about North northeast from the Neas, there lies a should of fourteen
fathom, and the ground is gross red sand, there wee lay at drift three hours,
or there about^ and it was still to the southwards, and then wee came to four
and twenty fathom, and the ground was gross stony sand.

Certain notes set down by the Author, what his Ship did run at sundry times.
ITem, I have sailed from Bronthollom to Goteland in 18. hours.

And from thence to Derwinda, in seventeen hours, having a fresh continual
wind, and the Ship being in her ballast.

Item, Earthollom and the West end of Bronthollom, lye one from another west
and by south, and east and by north, and are distant three leagues.

Item, the Castle at Bronthollom and the Bleckeside, lye the one off the other,
southeast and northwest.

Item, I have sailed out of the Flee over the Riff in 28 hours, having a mighty
and continuing wind, the ship being in her ballast.

Item, I have sailed from Bronthollom to Domesnesse, within 4. hours with a
stout gale a fore wind.

Item, I have likewise sailed within ten hours from Bronthollom to Yotland,
having a continual fresh gale of wind.

Item, I have sailed from Bronthollome to Gotelande, within four and twenty
hours, and from Goteland to Derwinda in seventeen hours, bearing as much sail
as the Ship was able to carry.

Item, I have sailed out off the south Perdris by Rochel to Bellille in four
and twenty hours, with a reasonable gale of wind.

Item, having a very great gale of wind I have sailed from the Fourne to the
Isle of Wight in 33. hours.

It^m, I have sailed out of the Hoofden to the Scow in 33, hou^s having a fresh
cool of wind, which carried vs w^ll in the running of three glasses two leagues
1/^. and I h^ue sailed to the Riff of Scaghen in 17. hours, and was as much as
the ship could bear up, and this was the third day of July. 1574. with a laden
ship.

The same third day of July, I sailed on forth from the Scow to thwart of the
Trendelles in 3. hours.

Item: I have with a fresh through bearing wind sailed from Flushing to Callis
in ten hours.

Item I have sailed from the Hoofden to the Scow, in three days carrying as
much sail as the Ship was able to ^eare, and in three days and three nights to
the Nase, which was every glass a league.

Item, I have sailed from Friburch out of the Elue to Rochell in five days, and
wee were two nights in the north sea, and two nights between the Hoofden and
the Fourne, and a night between the Kaiser or race and Rochel, with a mighty
continual wind, as much as mast and Tackle were able to bear.

Item with a fresh through bearing wind I have sailed from easter Penmarke to
Bellille in 8. hours.

Item with such a like wind, I have sailed from Bellille to Use in 6. hours.

Item I have sailed having a continual great gale of wind, out of the race of
Fountanie to Saint Martins Island, in twenty four hours.

Item, I have sailed from the south Peeretrees to Bellille in four and twenty
hours, with a reasonable gale of wind.

Item with a reasonable bearing gale, I have sailed from Bellille to Use in 10
hours.

Also with such like weather I have sail^ from Bellille to the Toper in 7.
hours.

Also I have sailed from Saint Martins Island to Use, in 7. hours having a
great cool of wind.

Item, with such a like wind I have sailed from Bellille ^o Penmarke in 9.
hours.

Item, I have sailed out of the race of Fountany to Use in 22, hours, having
but a reasonable gale of wind and fa^re weather.

Item I have sailed from the Fourne thwart of Portland with an easy gale of
wind in 24. hours.

Also I have with a good reasonable wind, sailed from the Needles in the Isle
of Wight, to Saint Powles in 28. hours.

Also I have sailed from the Fourne, to thwart of the Isle of Wight in 33.
hours, having a continual fresh gale of wind.

Also I have sailed from Beachy to Wight in 10. hours and forth to Portland in
7. hours.

Also I have with a fresh wind sailed from the Hage to thwart of Dunkirk in 18.
hours, and forthwith to the Hooffeden in 4. hours.

Also I have sailed from the Hage to the Hooffeden in 23. hours, which was with
a mighty gale of wind, as much as mast and tackle could bear.

And I have sailed with a fresh large wind, from Nargen to Woodhollome in 9.
hours.

Also with a like wind I have sailed from Nargen to Dagerort in 17. hours.

Also in the running of 28. glasses, I did sail from Banges riff to Scaghen.

Also I have with a reasonable gale of wind sailed from the Peertrees to
Bellille in 24. hours.

Item, I have with a reasonable gale of wind sailed from Bronthollom to
Fosterborne Riff in 9. hours.

Item I have sailed from Elsenore to the Scow in 20. hours, having but a
reasonable gale of wind.

Item Dagerort and Huntsfort lye the one from the other north northwest, and
south southeast, and are distant 8. leagues.

The course through the Belt, and these leagues are to bee counted for
Wekerses.
FIrst from the Trauen to Femeren it is 9. leagues and without to go about to
Stabuy it is 10. leagues, and the course is northeast and by north.

Item Stabuy is two leagues in l^ngth, and the cours^ is northwest.

Item from Stabuy to Langland, it is 5. leagues and the course is west
northwest, and against the south end of Langland, there lies a shallow within
half a League of Langland, you may sail between them both.

Item Langland is six leagues long, and the course is north a little to the
eastwards.

Item from Langland to Siroe it is 3. long leagues, and the course is northwest
and by north.

Item from Siroe to Rinse is three leagues, and the course is northwest and by
north.

Item from Rinse to Sessions is five leagues and the course is north and by
west.

Item, from Sessions to Siroe is 4. leagues, and the course is north northeast.
And directly over agains^ Siroe lies an Yland, which is called Wedero, from
thence lies out a Riff or bank, a great half league from Siroe, and you may
pass through between Siroe and the same riff or bank.

Item, from Siroe to Steuenshot is six good leagues, and the course is north
northwest.

Item from Steuenshot to the Sea Buy, it is 10. great leagues, and the course
is north and by west.

When you are very nigh unto the land, you have on Larbooad side the grounds of
Yotland, on which is 4. or 5 fathom, but you may not come any nearer to them.
And on your starboord lies the Riff of Lesold, you may come within 5. or 6.
fathom to that riff, but in the right channel is 10. or 11.

Item, when as you shall sail off from Steuens, and that you will sail over the
sweetring, toward the Dwaell grounds, the course is north northeast 14 leagues,
and then when you are come so far, that you can see the high land behind
seabuy, then bring that high land which lies behind Seabuy, so far northerly of
you, that Seabuy may bear north northwest, and so show it self clear without
the said high land.

And then sail on north northwest, and you shall have fast ground, and if you
have then 8.9. or 10. Fathom deep, then are you in the right channel.

Item from Seabuye to the Scow is 6. great leagues, and the course is north and
by east: and on your Larbooad lies a little Island which is called the Helmes,
you must take heed of that Island.

How to sail from the Scow through the Belt.


Item, the Riff stretches out East Northeast from the Scow, about a great
league from the Land, and you may well sail by it in 14. hours.

Item, from the Scow to the Helmes, the course is South and by west, and they
are distant 4. leagues, and in the right channel is 14. or 15. fathom, and the
more to the eastwards so always is the deeper water.

Also from the Holmes to Seabuy, the course is south and by west, and they are
distant 4. leagues, and against seabuy there lies the Dwaell grounds along by
the shore, and lie about half a league off from the land, and you may sail by
those Dwael ground^ keeping at 7.8.9.10.11. or 12. fatha^. For in the maine
channel is 10.11. or 12. fathom deep, and is fast ground.

And when the ^owne of Seabuy bears west from you, then are you right against
the Dwaell grounds, and East and by south from Seabuy, there lies the Island of
Lesol^ about three leagues off, and then leave two third parts of the water to
Lesold wards.



Also there lies a Riff west off from Lesolde about a league from the land: and
when you have the Church of Lesold east from you, then are you right against
the R^ffe.

Also when you shall sail through the Dwaell grounds to Steuens Hoof, the
course is south southwest, but and if you will leave Steuens Hoof on your
Larbooad side, then sail south and by east, and there in the right Channel is
six or seven fathom, and soft flat ground which is called Sweetring, and you
may boldly come on that side of Steuens Hoof at five fathom. But when you are
within Steuens Hoof, then you shall have deeper water, to wit 11.12. or 13.
fathom and hard ground. And the further you are off from Steuens Hooffe East
wards, the deeper water ye s^all have.

Also, about 3. leagues to the southwards of Steuens Hoofed, lies a little town
called Orund buy and along that runs a quick sand or landloose ground, which is
called black ground, and lies about half a league from the land.

Item, the course from Steuens Hoofed to Siro lies south southeast, and they
are distant 8. leag. And Helmes (which is a little Island) lies off from
Steuens Hoofed about south and by west and they are distant 4. leagues. And in
the right Channel between Steuens Hoofed and Siro it is 11.12. or 13. fathom
deep and is hard ground

And note, that in the right course east southeast from Helm, lies a quick sand
ground, which is called Hats Riff, and it is not past 4.5. or 6. fathom upon
it, but when you are past that, then thenceforth to Siro, you have 12 or 13.
fathom deep, and fast ground.

And this quick sand lies on the east side of the fair way, and east southeast
from this should lies an Island which is called Haslow, which lies so far off
that you can but eue^ see it, and you may sail through between Haslow and
Zealand along to the sound, and about west from Siro lies a little Island which
is called Wedero, and there lies out a Riff that stretches to within half a
league of Siro, and you may sail through between Siro and that Riff, and you
must leave two third parts of the way towards the west land (that is to say, on
that side ye Wedero is in,) and the other third part of the water on Siroes
side, but come no nearer then two third parts of the way or more, which leave
on Wederoes side, to wit, on ye west side, and the Riff lies off from Wedero
about east, and in the right channel it is 12. or 13. fathom deep.

Item, the course from Siro to Ruffians, is south southwest and they are
distant 4. leagues. And there lies a fl^t off from Ruffians, and runs southwest
off a little, half a league ^rom the shore, and take heed you come no nearer
there then 10 fathom.

Item, the course f^om Ruffians to Roems, is South southeast and they are
distant 4. league. And there lies a flat off from Roems, east southeast, about
a third part of a league, you may ride behind that for a Northeast wind, and
for a north and northwest wind, but you may not sail about by the westwards of
Roems: hard by south of Roems lies a little town which is called Cartmune.

Item, from Roems to Siro the course is south southeast and they are distant 4.
leag. And from the southend there lies out a small Riff northeast off about a
quarter of a league, and Neborke lies west southwest from Siro, and Neborke
lies in Uaneuan side. And there lies a little Island west southwest from Siro
about 3. leagues distant, and is called Uresselles, and there lies a Riff off,
and you must pass through between the Riff of Siro, and the Riff of Uresselles
And that Riff lies northwest and by north from the Uressel, and there lies a
should on the east southeast side of the channel.

Then from Siro to Langland, the course is southeast and they are distant 4.
leagues. And about west and by south of that, there lies ^ little Island,
(which is called Olmes,) and about 3. leagues from the North end of Langland to
the northwards, and there lies a Riff northeast from Langland, about a third
part of a league off. And Langland is 7. leagues long, and lies along south and
north. And to the east southeastwards of Langland, lies an Island called
Laland, and from the south end of Laland, there stretches out a Riff or bank
West Southwestwards about half a league from the shore, and to the southeast or
east southeastwards, there is a shallow water, as five, six, or seven fathom.

Item, from Laland to Femeren the course is east south east, and they are 5.
leagues distant.

Item, from thwart off Roborgherhert and Femeren, the course lies west
southwest.

Item from Femeren to the Trauen, the course lies south southwest, and they are
distant 13. leagues.

Item for to know the marks of Lalands Riff. First there stands a high steeple
on Laland, which stands in the town of Nascow, when as you have that steeple
east and half a point to the northwards off you, then shall you see two little
round Hillocks, seeming as though it were two Fishers boats, when as you have
broug^t those two Hillokes, and the said steeple in one, then you are near the
Riff of Laland.

The course from the Moons to Lubecke.
FIrst from the Moons to Ghestro Riff, the course is south southwest, and they
are distant two ke^nings. Ghestro Riff is a flat, and is a great league from
Ghestro, and Rostick, and the Riff lie one off another south and north, and are
distant 9. leagues.

Item, the course from Ghestro Riff to the the Trauen, is southwest and they
are distant 3. kennings. Missond and Rosti^ke are distant 7. leagues by land.

Rosticke and Wismer are distant 8. leagues by land, and Wismer and Lubecke are
distant 8. leagues by land.

Item in the channel sailing to Lubecke it is 14.15. or 16. fathom deep.

How to sail into Wismer deep.
TO sail in at the deep of Wismer, which goes in by the east side, you must
have ye steeple which stands on the southland to ye southwards of you, and sail
in so till you have brought the steeple which stands on the West land, near to
the most easterly house of those five or six houses which stand there, and by
those houses stands a tuffe of Trees together from the East land, and there
lies out a small Riff, that stretches off from the Eastland Nort^west and by
north, and when you have brought those steeples that stand upon the Eastland,
and those houses in one, then go south southeast in, and in that deep you shall
have 14. foot water. And in the Summer there are two tuns or Buys lying: the
one lies on the tail of the Riff, and the other on the shallow ground, and you
may sail through between them.

Here follows farther of Wismer deep.
ITem, to sail into Wismer deep, when you come from by east, then bear
southwest in with the west shore, till you have brought the sharpe steeple of
Wismer, and the point of the east shore in one. And then hale in southeast and
keep the steeple under the land, and there you shall have shallow water off 4.
or 5. fathom deep, and the very should is but 3. fathom, and when you come at
3. fathom then you shall have the point or corner of the west shore west and by
south from you, and after that three Fathom, you sh^ll have again now and then
three Fathom and less, but doubt not, but trust to your course, and to the
before written marks.

The Floods and Ebbes from Callis in Andolozia, to Hambrough.
FIrst at Calis Malis a south southwest moon makes a full sea.

Item, at Saint Lucas a Southwest Moon makes a full Sea.

Item, you have the like tide from thence to Lisbon.

Item, all the Coast of Spain, and Gascoine, Poitowe and Britain to Fonteny, it
flows a southwest and northeast Moon.

Item, in the River of Bordeaux a southwest and by west moon makes a full sea.

Item, a southwest and by west moon makes a full sea in the race of Fonteny.

At Saint Matthews a southwest and by west Moon.

At Fourne a West southwest moon makes a high water.

At Aberwracke a west southwest, and an east northeast moon makes a full sea.

Item, in the sea before saint Poules, an east northeast moon makes a full sea,
and within the Haven of Roscow a west southwest moon.

Item, two leagues without Ushant an east or West moon makes a full Sea, and
the same tide keeps on to Saint Poules.

Item. 9. Leagues without saint Poules it flows west northwest.

Item in the Road at Garnesey, a west and by south moon makes a high water.

Item from Garnesey to the Kaskets it flows Northwest.

Item 6. or 7. leagues without Garnesey it flows a northwest and by North moon.

Between the Kaskets and Portland along the coast a northwest and by north moon
makes a full sea, and seven or eight leagues off the land, a northw. moon makes
a full sea.

Item, at Silly, an east or west moon, and in Falmouth an east and by north
moon makes a full sea, and without in the sea an east and by south moon.

In Plimmouth and Dartmouth, an east and by North moon makes a full sea, and
without in the sea, an east S. east moon: along to Portland and within
Portland, an east southeast moon, and in the Rase southeast, and four Leagues a
seaboord, it flows a south southeast moon.

Item, at Needles in Wight, a southeast and by south moon. And at S. Ellen a
southeast Moon, and at the east end of Wight, and without in the Sea, a south
and by east moon makes a full sea.

Item, at Beachy a south moon, and without a south southwest moon makes a full
sea.

In the Comer a south and by east moon, and in the Downs a south southwest
moon. And without upon th^ north Coast of England east southeast the flood
comes from by north.

The Tides of the Coast of Flaunders.
ANd upon Flaunders Coast, a south and north moon makes a full sea at the shore
and in the Havens, and without in the fair way a Southwest and Northeast Moon.

Item in Zealand a southwest moon makes a full sea.

Item, a southwest and by South moon makes a full sea before the Maze, and
within, a south southwest Moon makes a full sea.

Item, in the Marsedeepe, an east or west moon makes a full sea.

Item, at the Flee, a southeast and northwest Moon.

Item, before the wester and easter Cames, a southeast and northwest moon makes
a full Sea.

Item, before the Weeser and before the Elue, and before Ankewsen a south or
north moon makes a full Sea.

Item, at Hambrough, it Flows at an east or west moon.

Item, a Southwest and a northeast moon makes a high water at Amsterdan.

The Tides serving specially for the Coast of England.
THe Moon south or north on the lands end full Sea.

The Moon south and by east, at the Gore end, full sea.

The moon south southwest between Holy Island and Tinmouth full sea.

It flows between Tinmouth and Flambroughhead, a southwest and northeast moon.

It flows between Flambrough-head and Bridlington in the Bay, a southwest and
by west moon.

The moon in the west southwest between Bridlington and Laurenas full sea.

It flows between Laurenas and Cromer, all along the well an east and west
moon.

It flows between Cromer and Yarmouth road to Layslow north road, a southeast
moon.

It flows between Laistow road and Orfordnes, a southeast and by south moon.

It flows between Orford and Orewell waives a south southeast moon.

It flows between the Naes and the ware head of Colne, a south and by east
moon.

It flows at the Spittes, and at the Scow, and al along the Swine, a south
moon.

At the west end of the Nor, a south and by west moon full sea.

It flows at Graues-end a south southwest moon.

It flows at London bridge a south west moon.

It flows at the Northland, a south southeast moon, and so along the Coast till
you come to Beachy: and in the Offing from the north Forland to the south
Forland, it runs half tide. And from the south Forland to the Naes to Fairly,
it runs half tide. And from fairly to Beche, it runs quarter tide under other.

It flows to ye westward of Beche a kenning, a southeast and by south moon.

It flows at Portesmouth, a south and by east moon.

It flows at S. Elins a south southeast moon^.

It flows on the sea side of the Island, a southeast and by south moon, and so
on the Land, and at the Needles, and runs qu^rter tide in the Offing.

It flows at Poole in the haven, a south east moon.

It flows at Waymouth, an east and west moon.

It flows at Portland, a southeast moon.

It flows from the west part of Portland till you come unto Plimmouth an east
and west moon.

It flows on the shore from Plimmouth to the Lizard, a west and by south moon,
and in the Offing a southeast moon.

It flows at Mount Bay, an east and west moon.

It flows at Selly: a west and by south moon.

It flows at the Lands end of Goolfe: a west southwest moon.

It flows all along the Coast up to Bristow, and the coast of Ireland from
Waterfoord to Kinsale, a west and by south moon.

Furthermore it flows (for the most part) from the Poole head of Burdeaur, all
along ^he Coast of Biskay, Ga^iza, Portugal, till you come to the straights of
Maliga, a southwest and northeast moon.

It flows at Flushing a southwest and by south moon

It flows at Antwerpe an east and west Moon.

It flows all along the Coast of Flaunders from the Wildings to Callis, a south
and by east moon: and so runs half tide under the other. It will flow a point
of ye Compas^e more in the Spring tides then in the neap.

Now here is one special thing to bee noted, and that is this: it flows o^e
point of the Compass more in the Spring streams, then it doth in any of the
quarters of the moon, (so that it bee a river where there is any indraught
having distance from the sea) when there is neither rage of winds, nor any
cause either to hinder or further the said effect.

As for example, thus: it flows at Grauesend at the change of the moon or full,
a south south west moon, Tides in a river that hath any distance unto the Sea.
but in any of the quarters of the Moon, it scant flows, a south and by west
moon: and this is general for ever.

The marks to go by the east, and of the Flee hard aboard the shore.
ITem your marks to go into the Souther sea, by the East end of the Flee, being
to the Westwards of it, you shall see two beacons, which stand on the east end
of the Flee, you must keep them both together, until you come within 4. or 5.
fathom of maine, and then you shall have sight of the first Buy, which ye must
go withal: and being at the first Buy, you shall go in along by the shore with
the second, in three Fathom, for it is not much deeper in that channel: you may
leave the Buy on which side ye will And as you draw near to the east end of the
Flee, you shall come to 7.8. or 9. fathom, but take heed you come not too near
the Flee, for it is there as you Looffe in very steep: therefore you must give
the point a pretty b^arth, going up in 4. or ^. Fathom, until you come to the
Buy which you shall see to the south southwestwards of you, wh^ch you must
leave on your La^boord side, and so go up along by the Flee, until the Beacons
begin to come together, where you may anchor in 4.5. or 6. fathom, as you think
best.

The marks to go in at the West gate by the Flee Island or Scaling.
IF ye come out of the Sea, and mean to go in at the wester Gate by the
Scaling, you shall see a Beacon stand upon the West end of the Scaling, hard by
the Tower, you must run in with the maine, keeping the Beaco^s of the Flee
together, until you see the foresaid Beacon and Tower in one, and thus you
shall find the first buy, which you must go in by, and so go in from it until
ye come to the other, your least water in this deep will be 3. fathom, and thus
going in from Buy to Buy, you shall come into the norther gate, and then you
may go up in that deep by those Buys, your course is then south and by west,
next hand.

The going in at the Norther gate.
IF you come out of the sea, and will go in at ye norther gate, look for a
great Beacon ye stands upon the west end of the Scaling, to the Eastwards of
the tower by the sea side, and thus having the Beacon and the Tower together,
you shall find the first Buy of this Gate which lies in 3 fathom at the least.
Leave it on your Starboord side, and go next hand south in with the next Buy,
leaving it on your larbooad side: to the next go in south and by west, and
leave that also on your Larbooad side: with the fourth Buy go south southwest.

How to go in with the wester Eames.
Coming out of the sea, to go in for ye wester Eames, if you will look out for
the first Buy, you shall see it whe^ you have brought the Boss south southeast
of you, the second buy lies from the Boss south and by east, the third Buy is
from that south: the fourth is south and by west: and these Buys doe lie east
and by south, and west and by north one off another, and by this you may know
what Buy you go in withal.

The courses from Headland to Headland about Island.
ITem from Ynge to Merchant Foreland, the course is west Afteene leagues, and
between them is the Buy called Portland Buy, and a league to the westwards of
Ynge is an Island called Ynge Island, and lies not a league from the maine.

Item, from Merchant Foreland to Westmonie, the course is west and by north 12.
leagues, and to the northwestwardes of Westmonie is a Bay, wherein is a
Harborough called Oribag, and to the Eastwards of Westmony lies two Lands, the
one called Risbell, and the other the Scatter, and they lie not two leagues
from that hau^n, and to the southwards of Westmony there lies also three or
four Lands called the Gent Lands, and the vt^ermoste of them lies 4. leagues of
the maine.

Item, from Westmony to the Rook the course is west northwest, 16, leagues, and
three leagues to the eastwards of the Rook is a haven called Genswick, and at
the point of the Rook lies two Lands, called the Ganet Lands, and they lie
three leagues off the Rook, to the west southwestwards.

Item, from the Rook to Snoffall foot, the course is north northwest twelve
Leagues, and between them is Hamford Bay, in the which goes in two sounds, the
one is Hamford and the other is called Keblewicke, and in the south part of the
Bay, is Rossimers Ness, and the north part is Snaffa^ foot, Rosimers Ness, and
the northwards of the Rook five leagues, and Botsum Haven is to the northwards
of the Rook three leagues.

Item, from Snoffall foot to fair Foreland, the course is north 11. leagues,
and between them is a great Bay called Snoffall Bay, and 3. leagues to the
northeastward of Snoffall foot in the Bay, is a haven called Gamlike.

Item, from Fair Foreland to Kettle Bay point, the course is northeast 16.
leagues distant, and between them in the Bay are these sounds, the next to the
Foreland is called Lousy Bay, and is there three leagues off, and to the
northeast of it is Anderffer, and the next Dereffer, next Northe^ffer, then
Pigs Hole, and Soundiffer, which is a sound yt is two leagues over: in that
sound is a good harbrowe called Scottelffer, and an Island called Blunt Island.

Item, from Kettlebaye to the Rag, the course is Northeast and by east six
leagues distant, and between them are these Bays, First Kettle Bay, then
Floudon Bay, next Wolffe Bay, and then the rag Bay.

Item, from the Rag to sound real point, the course is east northeast 20.
leagues, and betwixt them are these Bays and sounds, there is a Bay six leagues
to the eastwards of the Rag called Orgen Bay, and the easter point of that Bay
is called the Orgen point and that is the west point of a sound called
Langerdall, and within that sound is a Harborough called Stingarffer, and the
east point of Langerdall is called Shell Ness, and it is betwixt both points
eight leagues, and to the eastwards of Shell Ness is a sound called Calkerffer,
and in the mouth of that sound there are two Lands, the one is called the
Barnard and the other the Scate.

Item, from sound Real point to Simbernesse, the course is east northeast ten
leagues, and off the mouth of sound Real lies an Island called Gremsie, next
sound Real is flat and Flatstrand Bay, next is Oxenfer, and it is betwixt it
and Simbernesse 25. leagues.

Item from Simbernesse to La^gnesse, the course is east and by north 12.
leagues, and betwixt them is a black bay.

Item, from Watlingfer point to silly, the course is southwest 20. leagues
distant, and betwixt them is Strond Bay and Watlingfer.

Item, from Watlingfer point to Silly, the course is southwest 15. leagues, and
these are between them. First Rose bay, next Southerfer, and then Radcliffe,
next silly and in the mouth of Silly is an Island called Silly.

Item from Silly to the Horn, the course is west southwest 30. leagues off and
between them is first Dofhouse, Rock Bay, Pry Bay, Gooderwick, ne^t Pap Island
which lies a league from the shore, and off Doshouse lies a Rock five Leagues
off the shore, called the Whales back.

Item from the Horn to Ynge, the course is West and by south six leagues, and
between them is Ynge Bay.

Brief Notes of Saint Georges Channel.
NOw first from S. Denis head in Wales, to the Calfe of Mamis is 37. leagues,
and at S. Denis head it flows east and West half tide, and at the Isle of man
it flows southeast, and the flood runs to the Northeast wards.

Item, from the Calfe of Man to the mold of Galloy, the course is north and by
E. and they are 12. leagues distant.

Item from the Mould of Galloy, to the mould of Kinter, the course is N.
northwest, and they are distant 20. leagues.

Item the mould of Kinter and the sound of Ellye, lye the one from the other
north northwest, and south south east, and are distant 12. leagues.

Item, the Mould of Kinter and Carlos Isle lies south and north, distant six
leagues, and it flows there northeast.

Item betwixt Caraway and Cormeck Isle, it is five leagues.

Item, between Cormecke and Dentram five leagues and it flows there southwest
and by west.

Item, between Dentram and the sound of Ellie it is six leagues.

Item, between the small sound and Dowret it is four leagues, and it flows
there west south west.

Item, between Dowret and Lasternel is two leagues.

Item, b^tweene Lasternell and Albermorick, is four leagues and it flows there
east and west.

Item, from the mould of Kinter, all the sound along, until ye come to the Loch
against Abermorick, the flood runs to the northwards, and f^om the great Lo^gh
to the northwards, the ebb sets out West and th^ flood east, till ye come to
the sound of Mole.

Item, from Abe^moricke to Rowre Remory the course is east south east two
leagues.

Item, from Rowbrie Demorye, to Kettles Croffe, the course is north northeast
14. leagues, and it flows there east and by south.

Item, between the Kettles and Macknelles Castle, is two leagues, and it flows
a seaboord Macknelles Castle a Northwest and by west Moon, and the flood runs
there to the Northwestwards, and the ebb to the southeast.

Item, from Macknelles castle to seal Island, the course is west northwest, and
they are distant two leagues, and there is a very good road in the east
southeast side of the Seal Island.

Item, from Seal Island to Rowre, is ten leagues, and the course is North and
South, there the flood runs to the southwards, till you come to the northwards
of Lohcarim, and it flows there northwest.

Item, from Rowbrie to Fair head, the course is north and by east thirty
leagues, there the flood runs along the Coast to the Northwards, and the ebb to
the Southwards.

Item, Fair head and Holborn head, or Catnesse, lye East Northeast six leagues
distant, and there it flows a southeast and Northwest Moon, and the flood sets
to the nothwards.

Here follows the course from Woods Hollom up to the Nerve.
ITem, from Woods Hollom to the Isle of Nargen* the course is east northeast
six Leagues, and rhere lies a Rock east northeast from it two leagues off. At
this Island ye may see Revel steeple east southeast from it, about ten or
twelve miles.

Item, from the Isle of Nargen, to the Isle Hogland on Finland side, the course
is east northeast 26. leagues, and from Nargen over to Finland side, it is not
past 8. or nine leagues, and all the said coast of Finland, is full of rocks
and dangers.

Item, from the Isle of Hogland to the Isle Tuto, the course is southeast 4.
leagues, and with that course ye shall go to the westwards of Tuto.

Item from Tuto to the Nerve, the course is southeast and by east 8. leagues,
but in going from Tuto to the Naruewardes, ye must hale southeast, or southeast
and by south to go clear of the sholdes on Rufland side, the Latitude of the
Nerve is 60. degrees and 10. minutes.

Item, from the Nerve road the land lies west, until ye come as fa^re as Revel,
it is a fair Coast to sail by, and better passing by it then by Finland side,
or by Hogland except the wind be northerly.

Item, there is an Island west 12. leagues from ye Nerve, called Earthollom.
The said Isle is 2. miles from the main, there is good road about it. Also
there is an other Island between Earthollom and the Nerve road, that is but 8.
leagues west from the Nerve, and there is a good road about it, there is the
castle of Keysor^w by it, and on the Northside of it is a great ledge of Rocks
called the wrangles, they lie in the midst of the Sound, therefore beware of
them.

A brief way to shift the Sun and Moon by memory.
First, ye have to consider, that although the moon have prorperly but 29. days
12. hours and 44. minutes from Conjunction to Conjunction, yet in shifting the
Sun and Moon for knowing the tides, it shall not bee hurtful to give her 30.
days just, only to avoid fractions, or broken nu^bers in the use thereof, for
so small is ye error that grows thereby, that it is not to be accounted in any
one tide, to bee any annoyance to the Mariner.

Further, you have to note that ye 32. points of the Compass contain in this
use 24. hours of times, so that every point is just ^ of an hour. or 45. mi.
and every 24. hours the Sun and Moon depart the one from the other 48. minutes
which is just a point and 3. minutes more. And being 48. hours or two days old,
they are two points and 6. menu apart, and after this manner for every day of
her age ye must ad to their aper^iment 1. point and 3. mi. until she come to
the full or 25. d^ies old. And also ye shall note, that from the change to the
full she rises by day and hath her horns to the eastwards: and from the full to
the change hath her horns to the westwards, so that always her horns are turned
from the Sun, and also at the full she is directly against the Sun as appears
by the figure following on the other side.

And likewise ye shall note, ye continually at the instant of the full, the
moon rises at the present time, yt the Sun goes down in ye This is to be
understood when the moon hath no Latitude, but is just under the Ecliptic line,
for otherwise whe^ the M. hath her greatest N. or So. Latit. she will differ
for the most part more then half a point and sometimes an wholepoint and more
f^o^ the Suns opposite point in such places as bee f^rre towards the North or
South. opposite or contrary point, and therefore those that hold opinion yt the
moon always rises at the quart. at 12. of the clock at noon, and at the full at
6. of the clock at night, they are much deceived. For if the sun set at 4. of
the clock in winter, he goes near the southwest and by west, the moon being
then at the full in Canc. must needs rise at northeast and by east, at the same
present hour that the sun sets. And as many are deceived in this point, so are
there also many mistaken, and oftentimes greatly annoyed in an other point, and
that are those ye use in going with any bard harbrough, should, or land, to set
the moon by the compass, to know the time of the ^ull sea in any place, and
this is surely a dang^rous practise. For if the moon be in north signs as in
Gemini or Cancer, and that he seek the full sea on the East, or East Southeast,
then by setting the Moon by the compass, to know the full sea he may miss
almost 2. hours of his tide, and thereby come to a great annoyance, and knows
not how nor by what means it chances. Therefore let every man that shall stand
in need of this rule, practise ye use thereof by memory, which is more
co^mendable then Tables, but if their capacities serve the^ not to do it by
head, the^ I wish them to use rather such tables as are extant for that
purpose, until they are otherwise able to doe it by memory. For as the Compass
lying in all places horizontally, is imperfect to show the true apertiment of
the Sun^e and moon in the Zodiac, so likewise by ye imperfection, the co^passe
is at no time a t^ue dial to show the hour of the day, except for ye instant
time of the midday, or directly under the Poles of the World, where the
Equinoctial is in the horizon, or else in the Equinoct. points, except the flee
of the compass be lifted up a^ the Equinoct* is eleu^ted in the Lat. where the
observation is made. And this is most found in summer time, when the Sun is in
north Agnes, as in Cancer or Gemini, at which time it is almost ^. of the
clock, before the sun come to the east point of the compass, yet it is commonly
counted with many, that an east Sun by the Compass is alwaie^ 9. of the clock
in the mo^ning, and a west Sun to be 6. of the clock ^fter noon, and so
consequently for all the other points o^ the compass. But all this error comes
by the Horizontal lying of the Flee of the Compass as I before hath said. And
because the imperfection of the compass is caus^ of the error in reckoning the
tides, by setting ^he ^ it by the eye, the^fore I wish no ma^ to use it to ye
par^se bu^ to reckon their apartment by memory or by tables as I have before
said. And further here is to be ^oted yt the common compass being set ^ a point
to the eastwar^ of the true meridian of any place, as some Compa^ses are
almost^ a whole point, then I say by that Compa^se where the North point so
varies from the true meridian of the place, so much shall it be uncertain to
find out the ^oure of mid-day or noon, yet many makes not observation of the
Suns meridian Altitude, until he be at S. by this da^ted compass, and then is
the Sun past the iust^nt of the meridia^, and his Altitude some what decreased.

And ye more the Compass is varied to ye eastwards, the more shall the Sun^
altitude be decreased when he is come to that point, And as the south of the
compass ^oth make difference from the true Merid. in the Horizon, so doth all
the other points in like proportion from their proper place. And as the varying
compass is the only impediment heereof^, so is it likewise being varied
imperfect to know the apartment of the Sun and Moon by the point showed in the
Horizon. Therefore for the easier understanding of the willing learne^. I have
hereafter set down in plain sort a Compass Fi^e, and the manner how to know the
apartment by memory: how many points and minutes the Sun and Moon shall be
apart, for every particular day of her age.



The order of your compass, that is to know your points both with the Sun, and
against the Sun, beginning at the north point, as hereafter follows.
NOrth, north and by east, north northeast, northeast and by, north Northeast,
northeast and by east, east north East, east and by north, East* east and by
south, east southeast: southeast and by east, southeast, southeast and by
south, south southeast, south and by east South, south and by west, south
southwest, southwest and by south, southwest, southwest and by west, west
southwest, west and by south, west, west and by north, west northwest,
northwest and by west, northwest, northwest and by north, north northwest,
north and by west, north.

Thus it is said with the Sun, and as here ^lloweth against the Sun: north,
north and by west, north northwest, and so forth contrary wise.

And thus must you learn to say your Compass, bo^h with the Sun and against the
Sun.

Now when you have learned your compass with the Sun, and against the Sun
perfectly, you shall learn to bring 32 to 24, as hereafter follows.
Here is me^tioned before, your Compass wherein are 32. points, also you have
to every point 45. minutes and to your 32: points are 24. hours, and to your
24. hours there are 1440. menu. also your, 32, points are not an hour apiece,
for they lack 15. minutes a piece, of an hour. Also you shall take out of your
32, points 8, points, so there rests behind 24, points, which 24, points must
bee brought into 24 hours, you have mentioned here before your Compass, wherein
are 32 points. Also you have heer mentioned your 24 points, and also your 8
points. Now for to bring your 24 points to 24. hours, you have to every one of
your 24 points, 45. menu. a piece, and so they lack 15. minutes a piece of an
hour. Now for to make the 24. points 24. hours you have 8. points which you did
take out of your 32. points: also these 8. points must be parted into 24. parts
to make the 14. points 24. thou. Also you have to every one of your 24. points
45. min. the which 45. min. is three quarters of an hour. Also you have to
every one of your 8, points 45. min. a piece, and to your eight points there is
6. thou. and to your 6. hour. there is 18. score min. these 18. score min. must
be parted into 24, parts, and to every part 15. min. And when your 18. score
min. are parted give to every one of your ^4. points 15 minute, and that shall
make every point an hour, for 45 min. and 15. minute. makes threescore minutes,
and threescore minutes are an hour, and so your 24. points are 24. hours. So
that 8. points, make the 24. points 24. hours. and 32. points 24. hours. And so
giving to every 4 points 3. hours through your whole compass, in your 32.
points 24. hours, and you have to the 24. hours 1440. minut^, and this is
called th^ bringing of your thirty two points to 24. hours, and your 32. is
twenty four.

This rule of bri^ging 32. to 24. or any other number of points, given to the
number of hours contained in them, may eastlyer be performed thus:

As 3. is to 4. so is the number of the points given to the number of hours
contained in them. Therefore multiply the points given by 3. and deui^e the
Product by 4. for so the quotient shall be, the hours sought for.

As for Example.
If you would know how many hours 13. points of the Compass will make, multiply
13. by 3. the Product shall bee 39. which being divided by 4. the quotient
gives you 9 hours and three quarters.

Particular notes from the change to the full, to know how many points and
minutes the Sun and Moon are apart, during which time, the Moon seems by the
course of the diurnal motion to be behind the Sun: nevertheless by her proper
motion in the Zodiac, being swifter then the Sun, she goes continually before
him, until the instant of the next conjunction or change.
FIrst at 1. day old, the Sun and Moon are one point and 3. minutes a sunder,
and the Moon to bee behind^ the sun to the eastwards* and so unto the full.

At 2. days old, they are 2. points and 6. minutes a sunder.

At 3. days old, they are 3. points and 9. minutes a sunder.

At 4. days old, they are 4. points and 12. minute. a sunder

At 5. days old, they are 5. points and 15. minutes a sunder.

At 6. days old, they are 6. points and 18. minutes a sunder.

At 7. days old, they are 7. points and 21 minutes a sunder.

At 8. days old they are 8. points and 24. minutes a sunder.

At 9. days old, they are 9. points and 27. minutes a sunder.

At 10. days old, they are 10. points and 30. min a sunder.

At 11 days old, they are 11. points and 33. min. a sunder.

At 12. days old, they are 12. points and 36. min. a sunder.

At 13. days old, they are 13. points and 39. min. a sunder.

At 14. days old, they are 14. points and 42. min a sunder.

At 15. days old, they are 16. points and just a sunder, the one directly
against the other, and then is the moon at the full, until which time ye must
reckon the moon always to be so many points behind the Sun, as is aboue
expressed.

The apertiment of the Sun and Moon, from the full until the change: in al
which time the Moon is to bee reckoned before the Sunn^.
Item, at 16 days old, the Sun and Moon are 14 points and 42. minutes a sunder,
the Moon seeming to be before the Sun to the westwards.

At 17. days old, they are 13. points, and 39. minutes a sunder,

At 18. days old, they are 12. points and 36. minute a sunder

At 19. days old, they are 11. points and 33. menu a sunder

At 20. days old, they are 10. points and 30. menu. a sunder

At 21. days old, they are 9. points and 27. minutes a sunder.

At 22. days old, they are 8. points and 24. minutes a sunder.

At 23. days old, they are 7. points and 21. minutes a sunder.

At 24. days old they are 6. points and 18. minutes a sunder.

At 25. days old, they are 5. points and 15. minutes a sunder.

At 26. days old, they are 4. points and 12. min. a sunder.

At 27. days old, they are 3. points and 9. minute. a sunder.

At 28. days old, they are 2. points and 6. menu. a sunder.

At 29. days old, they are 1. point and 3. minute. a sunder.

At 30. days is the Conjunction of the Sun and Moon.

Now when you know by these Rules before showed, how many points the Sun and
Moon are apart, and whether she be before or behind the Sun, then is it easily
known by the course of the Sun, the hour and min. when the Moon shall come upon
any point of the compass, w^ere ye desire to know the hour of the full sea,
according to her age, as hereafter follows to make it plain by example.

An Example.
WHen the Moon is 10. days old, I desire to know^ at what hour the comes to the
south southeast to make full Sea at Callis, or in any other place where it
flows on that point^ ^ say then 10 days of her age shows her to bee 10. points,
and three times ten minutes from the sun and behind him. Now for seeking of the
hour of the full sea, the Moon being at south southeast, you must reckon the
Sun to be 10. points, and 30. min. before her to the westwards, which falls on
the west point, and 30. minutes to the Northwards. And therefore the Sun being
on that point, and 30. minutes to the northwards of the west, I say the full
Sea shall be at six of the clock and 30 minutes at Callis, and in all other
places where a south southeast Moon makes a full sea.

Another Example.
WHen the Moon is 18, days old, being before the Su^ne, I desire to know the
hour of the full sea, where an east moon makes a ^igh water, I consider that
the M. being but 18. days old, there is yet 12. days of her age to come which
shows the Moon to be 12. points, and ^6. min. from the Sun, and before him, the
Moon then being at the east and the Sun must be 12 points and 36. mi. behind
her, which is at northwest and 36. min: to the westwards. So the full sea where
it flows east or west, and the Moon 18. dai^s old shall be at 8 of the clock
24. minutes. And that by this computation is easily found in all places, and
upon every point of the Compass, the time of the full sea or high water, the
age of the moon being known as is before declared.

H^w to know the hour of the night by the Guards, by knowing on what point of
the Compass they shall be at midnight, every fifteenth day thorough out the
whole year.
FIrst you must understand, for the certain knowing of the points of the
compass, that North is always to be understood, directly over or aboue the
North star, and south under east, as you behold the star to the right hand
wards, and West to the left hand, ye guards seem to go against about the sun
lattrallye coming from East to north, and from north to west, and from thence
to the South, and so ^ound every three months of the year, occupying one
quarter of the Compass as follows.

January, Februa^ie, and March, occupy the Northeast quarter.

April, May, June, the northwest quarter.

July, August, and September, the sout^ west quarter.

October, November, and December, the southeast quarter.

And although I have only showed the hou^ of the night by Guards or little
Bear, yet the like also is to be known by any other notable fixed star^e, that
is near the Pole because the fixed ^tarres contain^d within the constellations
keep always one equidistant motion from the Pole, with out any great variety,
mooing always about the Pole, in.24. ho. every one in his proper Ci^cle,
according to the diurnal motion. So that by the point or place considered that
they occupy every month at midnigh^, may also easily be known the other hours
of the night, in reckoning every point to be of ^ an hour of time. And although
in this rule for the hour of the night, by the Guard, there be 4. imperfections
or error, growing by our view, being vpo^ the face or superficies of the earth
or water, yet so small is the error and so great the benefit of the hour of the
night, that I have rather thought it necessary to let dewn it with that error,
then to omit it and lack the benefit and use thereo^. And here I have occasion
given me somewhat to speak of them that have writte^ against mariners for their
gross judgements and erroneous ^ules, promising general reformation with new
instruments, which I long have desired, and daily look for to see extant, I
confess the Compass (which is the chief instrument of Navigation) to be most
erroneous and variable, by reason of the natural property received from the
Stone, as also because of the Horizontal lying of the Flee, for some uses. Yet
necessity causes vs to use it, because wee may by no means find better, nor
without it are able to help our selves in any Navigation. Also the Ma^ine plots
commonly made for the sea and Marine^s use, I acknowledge to be very erroneous,
and far from the true shape of the Globe or round body: yet I may not prefer
the use of the Globe in Navigation before them, ^or sundry causes, both for
want o^ true courses as also because ye variatio^. And the^o^e al such ^ules,
and inst^uments of Navigation, be the^ never so e^ronious and false, yet of
necessity they are tolerable and not to bee ^mitted, except it be possible
either to reform the old, or to make new more exact.

Now further to our former purpose for more plain understanding thereof, I will
set down where and on what point of the compass the Guards are found at
midnight, every ^5. days through the whole year, as hereafter follows, and for
the better understanding, I have here set the Flee of the Compass, with all the
points present.



Where the Guards are at midnight, every month in the year.
I. The 15. day of In. the Guards are at east at midnight.
The end of In. east and by north northerly at midnight
F. The 15. of February at northeast and by east at mid.
The end of February at northeast at midnight.
M. The 15. of Mar. at northeast and by N. northerly at mid.
The end of Marc. north and by east easterly at midnight.
A. The 15. of April north at midnight.
The end of April the Guards north and by west westerly at midnight
M. The 15. of May at northwest and by north at midnight
The end of May at northwest and by north at midnight.
I. The 15. of June northwest and by west Guards at mid.
The end of In. at w, and by N northerly Guards at mid
I. The 15 day of July at west Guards at midnight.
The end of July at west and by south southerly at mid,
A The 14, of August at southw, and by west westerly, at mid
The end of August the Guards southwest at mid.
S. The 15, of Sept, at southw and by So, southerly at mid,
The end of September at south and by west westerly mid.
O The 15 of October a south Guard is then midnight.
The end of October at south and by east easterly midn,
N The 15, of November, at southeast and by S, southerly mid
The end of November at southeast, then it is midnigh
D, The 15, of December, at southeast and by east easterly mid.
The end of December at east and by south southerly mid
Now when you know on what point of the Compass the Guards are always at
midnight, then may ye by it also know the hours before or after midnight,
always reasoning for every point that they shall lack of the midnight point ^
of an hour, and for every point that you shall find them to be past the
midnight point, likewise ^ of an hour, as for example.

Example.
THe 15. of January the Guards are at east at midnight, if then you find them
at south east, which is four points short of the east, that shows it to bee
four times 1/^ of an hour before midnight which is nine of ^he clock in the
evening.

If you find them past the east point, look how many points they are past, so
many times ^ of an hour is it past midnight, and this is a gene^all rule for
every month in the year. If the very same day of the month be not here
expressed, which you shall then occupy, then take the midst, or the end of the
same month that is next unto the same day, and so the error cannot be great.

The hour of the night is also known by the Guards or any other star ne^re unto
the north Pole, by divers sorts of instrum^nts made to that use, some divided
as the compass into 32. points, thereby reckoning ^ of an ho. for every point:
others divided into 24. hours, as this Instrument following which is to be made
of a Hoop of mettle divided into 24. hours, every hour having a little pin,
that it may be felt in the night when it cannot be seen, to number the hours.
This Hoop being divided into 4. equal parts, ye sh^l make fast a thread to
every quarter thereof, and the other 4. ends of them shall be fastened to a
ring in the midst of the instrument, through the which ye shall see the north
star. And thus holding it very upright, and of a reasonable distance fro^ your
eye, ye shall have the Guards directly with the pins in the Hoop, at such hours
as is numbered under the pin. But it is necessary that ye know by memory (as I
have before showed) what point those stars shall be on at midnight, and thus it
serves for any star near the Pole.



AT LONDON Printed by E. Allde, for Hugh Astley, and are to bee sold at his
Shop, at the corner of S. Magnus Church. 1605.


