THe Lord god that knows all things worteth well that I am right sorrowful for
to write or to make known this sente^ce beneth written where that of mine even
christe^ set in hie state and dignity so great blindness a^d malice may be
knowe^ that they that presume of them self to destroy vices and to plant in men
virtues / another dread to offe^de god nor lust to please him as their works
show. For certes the bidding of god and his law / which in the praising of his
most holy name / he commands to be known and kept of all men and women / young
and old* after the co^nynge and power yt he hath given to them / the prelates
of this land and their ministers / with the comment of prestys chefely
consenting to them / enforce them most besyly to withstonde and destroy the
holy ordinance of god. And there thorough / god is greatly wroth and moeuyd to
take harde vengeance not only upon them that doo the evil / but also on the^
all that consent to these Antichristys limns: Which know or might know their
malice a^d their falshode / and dress them not to withstond their malice and
their great pride. Nevertheless four things moves me to writes is sentence
beneth. The first thing that moeueth me hereto is this / that where as it was
knowe^ to certain friends yt I came fro^ the prison of Shrewisbury: and as it
befell in dede that I should to the prison of Canterbury: than diverse friends
in diverse places spake to me full hartefully and full tenderly: and commanded
me the^ if it so were that I should be examined before ye Archbishop of
Canterbury / that if I mygh^e in any wise / I should writ mine opposing and
mine answering. And I promised to my special friends / that if I might / I
would gladly do their biddinges as I might. The.ij. thing that moves me to
write this sentence is this / diverse friends which have herd that I have ben
examined before ye Archbishop / have come to me in prison and counselled me
basely / and coveted greatly that I should do the same thing. And other
brethre^ have sent to me and required me on gods behalf yt I should write out
and make knowe^ both mine opposing and mine answeri^g for ye profit yt (as they
say) over my knowlegi^g may come thereof. But this they bad me yt I should be
besye in all my wits to go as ne'er ye sente^ce and ye words as I could both
that were spoke^ to me a^d yt I spake. Up aue^ture this writing came a another
time before ye Archbishop and his counsel. And of this cou^selling I was right
glad: for in my co^scie^ce I was moved to do this thing / and to ask hereto ye
special help of god. And so tha^ I considering ye great desire of diverse
fre^des of sundry places according all in one: I occupied all my mind and my
writes so besyly yt thorough gods grace I perceived by their meyning and their
charitable desire some profit might come there throw. For sothe fastenesse and
troth hath these co^dicio^s. Where ever it is impugned: yt hath a sweet smell
and thereof comes a sweet savour. And ye more violently ye enemies dress the^
self to oppress and to withstond ye truth ye greater and the sweter smell comes
thereof. And therefore this heue^ly smell of gods word will not as a smoke pass
away with the wind: but it will descend and rest in some clean souleth at
thrusts there after. And thus somedele by this writing may be perceived throw
gods grace how yt the enemies of the truth standing boldly in there malice
enforce the^ to witstonde ye freedom of christ's gospel / for which freedom
Christ became ma^ / and shed his heart blood. And therefore it is great pit and
sorrow that many me^ and women do their awne weywart will: nor besye them not
to know nor to doo the pleasant will of God. Ye / men and women that hear the
truth and sothefastenesse / and hear or know of this / perceiving what is now
in the church / ought here throw to be the more moved in all there wits to able
them to grace / and to set lesser pryse by them self / that they without
tariynge forsake wilfully and bodily all the wrechednesse off this life / syns
they know not howe soon / nor wha^ / nor where / nor by whom god will teach
them and assay their patience. For no dout who that ever will live piteously
that is charitably in Christ Iesu shall suffer now here in this life
persecution in one wise or a another / that is if we shall be said: Yt behouyth
vs to imagine full besyly / the vilite and foulness of sin and howe the lord
god is displeasyd therefore: a^d so of this vilite of hydousnesse of sin it
behouyth vs to besye vs in all our wits for to abhor and hold in our mind a
great shame of sin ever / and so than we owe to sorrow heartily therefore / a^d
ever fleing all occasyo^ thereof. And tha^ behooves vs to take upon vs sharpe
penance continuing therein for to obtain of the lord forgiveness of our fore
done sins / and grace to abstain vs hereafter from sin. And but if we enforce
vs to doo this wilfully / and inconvenient time / the lord ( if he will not
utterly destroy and caste vs away) will in diverse manners move tyrants against
vs for to constrain vs violently for to do penance / which we would not do
wilfully. And trust that this doing is a special grace of the Lord / and a
great token of life and mercy. And no dout who ever will not apply him self (as
is said before) to ponyshe him self wilfully / another will suffer patiently
mekely and gladly the rod of the Lord howe so ever that he will punish him:
their wayward wills and their ynpacience are unto them earnyste of everlasting
dampnacyon. But because there are but few in number that do able them thus
faithfully to grace for to live here simply a^d purely and without gall of
malice and of grudging herefore the lovers of this world hate and pursue them
that they know patient / meke / chaste and wilfully poor / hating and fleing
all worldly vanites and flesshely lusts. For suerly their vertuouse conditions
are even contrary to the manners of this world. The third thing that moeuyth me
to write this se^te^ceys this. I thought I shall besye me in myself to doo
faithfully that all men and women occupiyng all their besynes in knowing and in
keeping of goddess co^maundmentys able them so to grace that they might
vnderstonde treuly the treuthe and have and use verteu and prudence: and so to
serve to be lychrenyd from aboue with heavenly wisdom: so that all their words
and their workys may be hereby made pleasant sacrifices unto the lord god: a^d
not only for help for their own soulys but also for edificacyon of all holy
church. For I dout not but all they that will apply the^ to have this foresaid
besynesse shall profer full mekyll both to frendys and to foes. For some
enemies of ye trout he throw the grace of god shall throw charitable folks be
made astoonyd in their conscience / and paraue^ture conuertyd from vices to
verteuys / a^d also they yt labour to know and to keep faithfully the byddynges
of god and to suffer patiently all aduersites shall here by co^forte many
fre^dys And the fourte thing that moeuyth me to write this se^te^ce is this I
know my sudden and vnwarnyd opposing and ansueryng yt all they yt will of good
heart without feynyng able the^ self wifully and gladly after their conning a^d
their power to follow christ patiently / travelling besyly privily and apertly
in work and in word to withdraw who so ever that they may from vices planting
in them ( if they may) virtues / co^fortyng them and fortheryng them that
stondyeth in grace: so that therewith they be not borne up into vein glory
throw presumption of their wisdom / nor enflamyd with any worldly prosperity:
but ever make a^d patient / purposing to abide stedfastely in the will of god
suffering wilfully and gladly without any grutchyng what so ever rod the lord
will chastise them with: than this good lord will not forget to comfort all
soch men and women in all their tribulacyons / and at every point of temptacyo^
that any enemy purposyth for to doo against them. Soche faithful lovers
specially / and patient folowers of christ / the lord sendyth his wisdom from
aboue to them: which the adversaries of the treuthe may not know nor
vnderstonde. But throw their old and new unshamefast sins those tyrantys and
enemies of southfastnesse shall be so blinded and obstinate in evil that they
shall wene themself to doo pleasant sacrifices unto the lord god in their
malicious and wrongful persewyng and destroying of innocent mennys and women's
bodies which men and women for their vertuouse living and for their true
knoulegyng of the treuythe and their patient wilful and glad suffering of
persecution for ryghteuousnes deserve throw the grace of god to be heirs of the
endless bliss of heaven. And for the fervent desire and the great love that
those men have as to sta^de in sothefastenesse and witness of yt / though they
ben suddenly and vnwarnyd brought forth to be apposyd of their adversaries: the
holy goste: yet that moeuyth and reulyth them throw his charity will in the
hour of their ansueryng speak in them and show his wisdom that all their
enemies shall not again seye nor against stand lawfully. And therefore all they
that are steadfast in the feythe of god / ye / which thorough dilige^t keeping
of his comau^dementys / and for their pacie^t suffering of what so ever
adversity that comes to them / hope surely in his mercy: purposing to stand
continually in perfect charity For thoes me^ and women dread not so the
aduersites of this life that they will fear (after their conning a^d their
power) to knowledge prudently the truethe of goddess word / when / where / and
to whom that they think their knoulegyng may profit Ye and though therefore
persecution come to the^ in one wise or a another / certes they pacie^tly take
hit knowing their co^uersacio^ to be in heue^. Yt is an hye reward and a
special grace of god for to have and enjoy as ye everlasting inheritance of
heaven / for the suffering of one persecution in so short time as is the term
of this life. For lo this heavenly heritage and endless reward is the lord god
him self wych is the best thing that may be. This sente^ce wytnessyth ye lord
god him self whereas he said to Abraha^ I am thy mede. And as the lord said he
was and is the mede of Abraham: so hays of all his other saints This most
blessyd and best mede he grant to vs all for his holy name that made vs of
nought / a^d sent his only most dear worthy son / our lord Iesu christ for to
redeem vs with his most precious heart blood Amen.

Known be yt to all men yt rede or hear this writing benethe: that on the
sunday next after the feste of saint Peter / that we call lammesse in the year
of our lord a.M.CCCC. and.vij. year. I william of Thorpe being in prison in the
castle of Saltwode was brought before Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury
and Chancellor than of England. And when that I came to him / he stood in a
great cha^ber and much people about him: and when that he saw me he we^t fast
into a closett bidding all secular men that followed him to go forth from him
soon / so that no ma^ was left than in that closet but ye Archbishop himself
a^d a physician yt was called Malueren person of saint Dunstanys in London and
other two personys unknown to me which ware minysterys of ye law. And I
sta^dyng before the^ by and by the Archbishop said to me William / I know well
yt thou hast this twe^ty winter and more trauelyd about besyly in ye north
country and in other diverse contres of Ingla^d sowyng about false doctrine /
having great busynesse if thou might with thine vntrew reaching and shrewyd
will for to infect and poison all this la^de. But through ye grace of god thou
art now wythstondyd and brought in to my ward / so yt I shall now sequester the
from thine evil purpose / and let yt to enuenyme ye sheep of my province. Never
the less saint Paul seythe If it may be as far as in vs is we owe to have peace
with all men. Therefore William if thou will now mekely and of good heart /
without any feynyng / kneel down and leye thy ha^de apo^ a book a^d kiss yt
promising faithfully as I shall here charge the that thou wilt submytthe to my
correccyon / and sta^de to mine ordinau^ce / and fulfil yt dewly by all thy
conning and power: thou shall yet find me gracious unto ye. Than said I to ye
Archbishop. Sir syns ye deem me an heretyke out of believe will ye give me here
audie^ce to tell my believe. And he said / ye tell on. And I said I believe yt
there is not but one god almighty / and in this god heed and of this godhede a^
three persons / yt is ye fader / ye son a^d the sothe fast holy goste. And I
believe that all these three persons are even in power and in conning a^d in
might full of grace and of all goodness For what ^o ever that the father doth
or can or will / that ^hyng also ye son doth and can and will: a^d in all their
power conning and will ye holy goste is equal to the father and to ye son. Over
this I believe that thrugh cou^sell of this most blessyd trinity in most
conuenie^t time before ordenyd for the salvation of man kind the second pearson
of this trinity was ordenyd to take the form of man / that is the kind of man.
And I believe that this second person our lord Iesu christ was conceiuyd
thorough the holy goste into the womb of the most blessyd virgin Mary with out
ma^nys seed. And I believe that after nyne monethys Christ was borne of this
most blessyd virgin without any peyne or brekyng of the closter of her womb /
and without fylthe of her virginity. And I believe that Christ our saviour was
circuncisyd in the eight day after his birth in fulfilling of ye law / and his
name was called Iesu which was called of ye angel before yt he was co^ceiuyd in
ye wo^be of Marie his moder. And I believe yt Christ as he was about thirty
year old was baptised in ye fludde of Iordane of Iohn^ baptist / and in
likeness of a dove ye holy goste descendyd there upon him: and a voice was herd
fro^ heaven seiyng. Thou art my welblouyd son In the I am full pleasyd. And I
believe that Christ was moeuyd than by the holy goste for to goo in to desert /
and there he fastyd forty days a^d forty nights without bodily meat and drink.
And I believe that by and by after his fasting when the manhood of Christ
hongeryd the fiend came to him a^d te^ptyd him in glotony / in veyn glory / and
in couetyse / but in all thoes temptacyo^s Christ concludyd the fend a^d with
stood him And than with out tariyng Iesu began to preach and to seye unto the
people / doo ye penance / for the realm of heaven is now at hand. And I believe
yt Christ in all his time here lived most holily and taught the will of his
fader most truly / and I believe that he sufferyd therefore most wrong fully
greatyst repreuys and despysynges. And after this when Christ would make an end
here of his temporal life. I believe that in the day next before that he would
suffer passion on the morn: In form of breed and of wine he ordenyd ye
sacrame^te of his flessh and his blood yt is his own precious body / a^d gave
it to his apostles for to eat / co^maundyng them and by the^ all their after
comers: yt they should doo it i^ this form that he showed to them / use them
self and teach and commone forth to other men and women this most worshipful
holiest sacrame^t / in myndefulnesse of his holiest living and of his most true
teaching / and of his wilful and pacie^t suffering of the most painful passion
And I believe yt thus Christeour saviour / after yt he had ordenid this most
worthy sacrame^t of his own precious body: he we^t forth wilfully against his
enemies / and he sufferyd the^ most patiently to ley their ha^dys most
viole^tly upon him / and to bind him / and to lead him forth as a thief / and
to scorn him / a^d buffet a^d all to blow or fyle him with their spittinges
Over this I believe that Christ suffered most mekely and patiently his enemies
for to dinge out with sharpe scourges the blood that was between his skin and
his flesh: ye without grudging Christ suffered ye cruel Jaws to crown him with
most sharp thorns and to strike him with a rede. And after Christ suffered
wicked Jaws to draw him out upon the cross and for to nail him there upon foot
and hand. And so thorough this pitiefull nailing Christ shed out wilfully for
mans life the blood that was in his veins. And then christ gave wilfully his
spirit in to the hands or power of his father / and so as he would and when he
wold Christ deid wilfully for mans sake upon ye cross And notwithsta^dinge yt
Christ was wilfully / painfully a^d most shamfully put to deeth as to the world
/ there was left blood and water in his heart as he before ordened that he
would shed out this blood and this water for mans salvation. And therefore he
suffered the Jaws to make a blind knight to thrust him in to the heart with a
sphere and this the blood and water yt was in his heart Christ would shed out
for ma^s love. And after this I believe that Christ was taken down from the
cross and buried And I believe that on ye third day by power of his god heed
Christ rose again from death to life. And the.xl. day there after I believe
that Christ ascended up in to heaven and that he there sits on the right hand
of god the father almighty. And the tenth day after this up going he sent to
his apostles the holy goosed that he had promised them before. And I believe
that Christ shall come and judge all mankind / some to everlasting peace and
some to everlasting pains. And as I believe in the father and in the son that
they are one god almighty / so I believe in the holy goosed that is also with
them the same god almighty. And I believe an holy chirche that is all they /
that have bin and that now are and always to the end of the world shall be a
people the which shall endeavour them to know and to keep the commandments of
god / dredinge over all thing to offend god and loving and seeking most to
please him. And I believe that all they that have had and yet have and all they
that yet shall have the foresaid ververtuous surely standing in the belefe of
god / hoping steadfastly in his merciful doings / co^tinuynge to their end in
perfect charity / wilfully / patiently and gladly soferynge persecucio^s / by
the example of Christ chiefly a^d his apostles / all these have their names
written in the book of life. Therefore I believe that the gaderynge together of
this people living now here in this life is the holy church of god feyghtynge
here on earth against the fend / the prosperyte of the world and their fleshely
lusts. Wherefore saying that all the gadering together of this church before
said and every part thereof another covets nor wills nor loves nor seeks any
thing but to eschew the offence of god and to do his pleasing will: mekely /
gladly and wilfully of all mine heart I submit my self unto this holy church of
christ to be ever buxsom and obedient to the ordinance of it and of every
member thereof after my knowledge and power by the help of god. Therefore I
knowledge now a^d evermore shall / if god will / that of all my heart and off
all my might I will submit me only to the rule and governance of them whom
after my knowledge I may perceive by the having and using of the beforesayd
virtues to be members of the holy church. Wherefore these articles off belefe
and all other both of the old law and of the new / which after the commandment
of god any man ought to believe / I believe verily in my soul as a sinful
deadly wretch of my cunning and power ought to believe praying the lord god for
his holy name for to increase my belefe and help my vnbelefe. And for because
to the praising of gods name I desire aboue all thing to be a faithful membre
of holy church I make this protestacyon before you all four that are now here
present / coveting that all men and women that now absent knew the same / that
what thing so ever before this time I have said or done / or what thing here I
shall doo or say / at any time here after. I believe that all the old law and
the new law given and ordened by the council of these three persons of the
trynite were given and written to the salvation off mankind. And I believe that
these laws are sufficient for mans salvation. And I believe every article of
these laws to the entente that these articles were ordened and commanded of
these three persons off the most blessed trynyte to be believed. And therefore
to the rule and the ordinance off these gods laws mekely / gladly and wilfully
I submit me with all mine heart that who ever can or will by ouctoryte off gods
law / or by open reason / tell me that I have erred or now err or any time here
after shall err in any article of belefe (fro which inceonvenience god keep me
for his goodness) I submit me to be reconciled and to be buxum and obedyente
unto these laws of god and to every article of them. For by auctorite /
specially of these laws / I will / thorough the grace of god / be vnyed
charitably unto these laws. Ye sir and over this I believe and admit all the
sentences / auctorites and reasons off the saints and doctors according unto
holy scripture and declaring it truly. I submit me wilfully and mekely to be
ever obedient after my conning and power to all these saints and doctors as
they are obedyente in work and in word to god and to his law / and forther not
to my knowledge no^ for any erthly power dignity or state / thorough the help
of god. But Sir I pray you tell me if after your bidding I shall lay my hand
upon the book to the entente to swear thereby? And the Archbishop said to me /
ye / wherefore else? And I said to him. Sir a book is no thing else but a thing
coupled together of diverse creatures / and to swear by any creature both gods
law and mans law is against. But Sir this thing I say here to you before these
your clerckes / with my foresaid protestacion / that howe where / when and to
whom men are bou^de^ to swear or to obeye in any wise after gods law and saints
and true doctors according with gods law: I will thorough gods grace be ever
ready thereto with all my conning and power. But I pray you sir for ye charity
of god yt ye will before that I swear as I have here rehearsed to you tell me
how or whereto yt I shall submytt me: and show me whereof yt ye will correct
me: and what is the ordinance that ye will thus oblige me to fulfil.

And ye Archbishop seid unto me. I will shortly that now thou swear here to me
that thou shalt forsake all the opinions which the sect of Lollardes hold / and
is slandered with: so that after this time another privily nor apertly thou
hold any opinio^ which I shall after that thou haste sworn rehearse to y^ here.
Nor thou shalt fauer no man nor woma^ / young nor old yt holds any of these
foresaid opinio^s: but after thy knowledge and power thou shalt enforces to
withstand all soche distroblers of holy church in every diocese that thou come
in: and the^ that will not leave their false and damnable opinions thou shalt
putt them up publishing them and their names / and make them known to ye bishop
of the diocese that they are in or to the bishops mynistres. And over this I
will that thou preach no more unto the time that I know by good witness and
true yt thy co^uersacion be soch that thy heart and thy mouth accord treuly in
one co^trariyng all ye lewd learning that thou hast taught here before.

And I hearing these words thought in my heart that this was an vnlefull a
sting: and I demyd myself cursed of god / if I co^sented hereto and I thought
howe Susan seid. Anguyssch is to me on every side. And in yt I stood still and
spake not / the Archbishop seid to me. Answer one wise or a another. And I
seid. Sir / if I co^sented to you thus / as ye have here rehearsed to me / I
should become an appelar / or every bishopis espy / somonour of all Englonde.
For and I should thus put up / and publish ye names of me^ and wome^ I should
here in deceive full many persons: ye sir as it is likely by ye dome of my
co^scie^ce I should herein because of ye death both of me^ and wome^ ye both
bodily and gostely. For many me^ and wome^ that stand now in ye treuthe / and
are in ye way of salvation: if I should for the learning and reding of their
believe publish the^ and put the^ therefore up to bishops or to their
vnpituouse ministers I know some del by experience yt they should be so
distrobled and diseased with persecucio^ or other wise yt many of the^ (I
think) wold rather chose to forsake the way of treuthe tha^ to be trailed
scorned and slandered or punished as bishops and their ministres now use for to
constrain men and women to consent to the^. But I find in no place in holy
scripture / that this office yt ye would now enfeffe me with accordith to any
priste off christ's sect / nor to any other christe^ man. And therefore to do
thus werto me a full noyeous bo^de to be bounde^ with and over grievous charge.
For I suppose yt if I thus dede many men and women wold / ye sir / might justly
unto my co^fusion sey to me / that I were a traitur to god and to them: syns
(as I think in mine heart) many me^ and wome^ trust so mekle in me in this case
/ yt I wold not for saving of my life do thus to the^ For if I thus should do
full many me^ and wome^ would (as they might full truly sey / that I had fasly
and cowerdly forsaken the truth / and slandered shamefully the word of god. For
if I co^sented to you to do hereafter your will for bonchefe or mischief yt may
befall to me in this life / I deem in my conscience yt I were worthy herefore
to be cursed of god and also of all his soynctes / fro which inconvenience keep
me and all christen people almighty god now and ever for his holy name* And
than the Archbishop seid unto me. O thine heart is full harde endured as was yt
herre of Pharao / and the devil hath over come^ the and perverted the / and he
hath so blinded the in all thy wits / that thou haste no grace to know the
treuthe / nor ye measure of mercy yt I have proffered to ye. Therefore as I
perceive now by thy foolish answer / thou hast no will to leave thine old
errors. But I sey to ye lewd losel / other thou quikly consent to mine
ordinance and submit ye to stand to my decrees: or by saint Thomas thou shalt
be disgraded / and follow thy fellow in Smithfelde. And at this saying I stood
styll and spake not / but I thought in mine heart yt god did to me a great
grace / if he would of his great mercy bring me to soch an end. And in mine
hart I was nothing frayed with this menasi^g of ye archbishop. And I co^sidered
there.ij. thi^ges in hi^. One / yt he was not yet sorrowful for yt he had made
Willia^ Soutre wrongfully to be burnt. And as I considered that ye Archbishop
thirsted yet after more shedi^g out of innocent blood. And fast therefore I was
moved in all my wits for to hold ye archbishop another for prelate nor for
priest of god / and for ye mine inward ma^ was thus altogether departed fro^ ye
archbishop me thought I should not have any dread of hi^. But I was right heavy
and sorrowful for yt there was none audie^ce of secular me^ by: but in mine
hart I pried ye lord god for to co^forte me and strength me against the^ yt
there ware against the sothefastenesse. And I purposed to speak no more to the
Archbishop and his clerckes than me need behooved: and all thus I prayed god
for his goodness to give me than and always grace to speak with a meke a^d an
easy spirit: and what soever thing yt I should speak that I might thereto have
true authorites of scriptures or open reason. And for yt I stood thus still and
nothing spake / one of the Archebisshopes clerks seid unto me.

What thing musiste thou? do thou as my lord hath now co^maunded to the here.

And yet I stood still and answered him not / a^d than soon after ye Archbishop
seid to me. Art thou not yet bethought / whether thou wilt do / as I have here
seid to the? And I seid tha^ to him.

Sir my father and my mother on whose souls god have mercy ( if it be his will)
spent mekyll money in diverse places about my learning for the intent to have
made me a pressed to god. But when I came to years of discretion / I had no
will to be priest / and therefore my fre^des were right heavy to me / and tha^
me thought their grudgi^g against me was so painful to me / yt I purposed
therefore to have left their co^pany. And whe^ they perceived this in me they
spake some time full feire and pleasant words to me: but for yt they might not
make me to co^sent of good heart to be a priest / they spake to me full oft
times very grievous words / and manassed me i^ diverse manners shewi^g to me
full heavy chere. And thus one while i^ feire manner / a another while in
grievous they were lo^g time as me thought full bossy about me or I co^sentid
to the^ to be a priest. But at ye last wha^ in this matter they wold no lo^ger
suffer mine excusacions / but other I should co^sent to the^ or I should ever
bear their indignation / ye / their curse (as they seide) Tha^ I seeing this
pried them that they wold give me licence for to go to them that were named
wise priestis and of verteuous conversation to have their counsel / a^d to know
of them the office and the charge of priesthode. And hereto my father and my
mother consented full gladly / a^d gave me their blissing and good leave to go
/ and also money to spend in this journey. And so than I went to tho priestis
whom I herd to be of best name / a^d of most holy living / and best learned /
and most wise of heavenly wisdom: and so I communed with them unto the time
that I perceiuyd by their verteuous and continual occupacions yt their honest
and charitable works passid their fame which I herd before of them. Wherefore
sir by the example of the doctrine of them / and specially for the godly and
innocent works which I perceived than of them and in them / after my conning
and power I have exercised me than and in this time to know perfectly goddis
law / having a will and a desire to live there after / willing that all men and
women exercised the^ self faithfully there about. If than sir other for
pleasure or displeasure of them that are another so wise / nor of so verteuouse
conversation to my knowledge / nor by common fame to any other mannis knoulege
in this land as these men were of whom I toke my counsel and information: I
should now forsake thus suddenly and shortly a^d vnwarnid all the learning yt I
have exercised my self in this thirty winter and more. My conscience should
ever be herewith out of measure vnquietid / and as sir I know well that many
men and women should be there throw greatly troubled and sclaunderid / and as I
seid sir to you before. For mine vntrewthe and false cowardnesse many a one
should be put into full great reprefe / ye sir I dread / that many a one (as
they might than iustely / would curse me full bitterly / and sir I fear not /
but the curse of god / which I should deserve here in / would bri^g me to a
full evil end / if I continued thus. And if thorough remorse of conscience I
repe^tid me any time returning in to the way / wych / you doo your diligence to
constrain me now to forsake / ye sir / all ye bisshopis of this la^de with full
many other priestis would defame me / and pursew me as a relapse / and they
that now have (though I be unworthy) some confidence in me here after would
never trust to me though I cowlde teach and live never so verteuously more than
I can or may. For if after your counsel I left utterly all my learning / I
should hereby first wound and defile mine own soul / a^d also I should here
through give occasio^ to many men and women of full sore hurting / ye sir as it
is likely to me / if I consented to your will I should herein by mine evil
example in it / as far as in me were / slay many folk gostely / that I should
never deserve for to have grace of god to the edifiyng of his chirche another
of my self / nor of none other man life: and undone both before god and man.
But sir by example chefely of some whose names I will not now rehearse / H / of
I / P / and B / and also by the present doing of Philip of Ra^penton that is
now become^ Bishop of Lincoln I am now learned as many mo hereafter thorough
goddis grace shall be learned / to hate and to fl all soche sclau^der yt these
foresaid men chefely has defiled principally the^ selfes with. And in it yt in
the^ is they have enuenemid all ye chirche of god for ye sclaunderous revoking
at ye cross of pales of H. P. and of B / and how now Philip Ra^penton persewith
cristis people. And ye feining / yt these men dissemble by worldly prude^ce
keeping the^ cowerdly in their preaching and communing within the bonds a^d
terms ( which without blame may be spokyn and shewid out to the most worldly
livers) will not be vnponisshid of god. For to the point of truth that these
men shewid out some time they will not now streche forth their lives. But by
example eche one of them as their words and their works show they bossy them
thorough their feinyng: for to sclaunder and to persewe Christ in his members /
rather than they will be persewid.

And the Archbishop seid to me. These men the which thou spekist of now were
fools and heretics: when they were counted wise men of the and other soche
loselles. But now they are wise men / though thou and soche other deny them
unwise. Nevertheless I wit never none / that right seide / that any while were
enuenymed with your contagiousnesse / that is / contaminate and spotted
doctrine.

And I seid to the Archbishop. Sir I think well that these men and soche other
are now wise as to this world / but as their words sou^did sometime and their
works shewid outwardly / it was likely to move me yt they had earnest of the
wisdom of god / and that they should have deserved mikell grace of god to have
said their own souls and meny other mennis if they had continued faithfully in
wilful poverty and in other simple verteuous living and specially / if they had
with these foresaid vertueis continued in their bossy frutefull sowing of
goddis word: as to many mennys knoulege they occupied the^ a season in all
their wits full besyly to know the pleasant will of god / travelling all their
me^bres full besily for to doo there after / purely and chefely to the praising
of the most holy name of god / and for grace of edificacion and salvation of
christen people But wo worth false covets / and evil counsel / and tyranny by
wiche they and many men and women are led blindly into an evil end.

Than the Archbishop seide to me. Thou and soche other losellis of thy sect
would shave your berdis full ne'er for to have a benefice. For by Iesu I know
none more covetous shrews than ye are / when that ye have a benefice. For lo I
gave to Iohn^ Purvey / a benefice but a mile out of this castle / and I herd
more complaints about his covetousness for tithes a^d other mysdoyngys than I
did of all men that were advanced within my diocese.

And I seid to the Archbishop. Sir purvey is another with you now for the
benefice yt ye gave him / nor he holds faithfully with the learning that he
tawght and writ before time and thus he shewith him self another to be hot nor
cold: and therefore he and his felaws may sore dread that if they torn not
hastily to ye way that they have forsakyn: paraue^ture they be put out of the
nombre of cristis chosyn people.

And the Archbishop seid. Though Purvey be now a false harlot I quyte me to him
/ but come he more for soche cause before me: or we depart I shall know with
whom he holds. But I sey to the. Which are these holy me^ and wise of whom thou
haste takyn thine information.

And I seid. Sir / Master Iohn Wicleff was holden of full many men the greatest
clerk that they knew than living / and therewith he was named a passing ruely
man and an ynnocent in his living and herefore great men commonyd oft with him
and they loved so his learning that they writ it / and besily enforced them to
rule themself there after. Therefore sir this foresaid learning of Master Iohn
Wicleff is yet holden of full many men and wome^ the most agreeable learning
unto the living a^d teaching of Crest and of his Apostles / and most openly
showing and declaring how the chirche of Crest has ben and yet should be rolled
a^d governed. Therefore so many men and women covet this learning / and purpose
/ thorough goddis grace to conform their living like to this learning of
Wicleff. Master Iohn aiston tawght and writ accordingly a^d full besily where
and when / and to whom that he might / and he used it himself right perfitely
unto his lifes end. And also Philip of Rampenton while he was a chanone of
Lacester / Nicolas Herforde Day Gotray of Pakring monk of Bylande and a master
of divinity / and Iohn Purnay a^d many other which were holden right wise men
and prudent touched and writ besily this forced learning and conformed them
thereto. And with all these men I was oft right homely a^d communyd with them
long time and oft: and so before all other men I choes wilfully to be infourmyd
of them and by them and specially of Wicleff himself / as of the most verteuous
and godly wise me^ that I herd of or knew. And therefore of him specially and
of these men I took the learning that I have touched and purpose to live there
after (if god will) to my lives end. For though some of these men be contrary
to the learning that they taucht before I wot well yt their learning was true
which they touched: a^d therefore with the help of god I purpose to hold and to
use the learning which I harde of the^ / while they sat on Moyses chair / and
specially while that they sat on the chair of Crest. But after ye works that
they now do I will not doo with goddis help. For they feyne and hyde a^d
co^trarie the truth which before they taucht out plainly and truly. For as I
know well when some of these men has ben blamyd for their sclaunderous doing /
they grau^te not that they have touched a miss or cried beforetyme / but yt
they were constreinyd by pain to leave to tell out the sothe / and thus they
choese now rather to blaspheme god than to suffer awhile here persecution
bodily for sothefastnesse that Christ shed out his heart blood for.

And the Archbishop seid. That learning that thou callist truth and
sothefastnesse is open sclaunder to holy chirche / as it is provide of holy
chirche. For all be it / that Wicleff your author was a great clerk and though
that many men held him a perfect liver yet his doctrine is not approuyd of holy
cherche but many sentences of his learning are da^pnyd as they well worthy are.
But as touching Philip of Ra^peton yt was first chanone and after Abbot of
Lacester which is now bishop of Lincoln: I tell the that the day is come for
which he fastyd the euene. For another he holds now / nor will holds learning
that he thought when he was a Chanon of Lacester. For no bishop of this la^de
persewith now more sharply them that hold thy way than he doth.

And I seid. Sir full many men and women wonderith upon him and speaks him
mekill shame and holds him for a cursed enemy of the treuthe.

And the Archbishop seid to me. Wherefore tarriest thou me thus here with soche
fables / wilt thou shortly (as I have seid to the) submit the to me or no?

And I seid. Sir I tell you at one word / I dare not for the dread of god
submit me to you after the tenor and sente^ce that ye have aboue rehearsed to
me.

And than as if he had ben wroth he seid to one of his clerkis. Fetch hider
quikely the certificacio^ that came to me fro Shrewisbury under the bailiues
seal witnessing the errors and heresies which this losel hath venomously sown
there.

Than hastily the Clerk took out / and leid forth on a cupborde diverse rollis
and writings / among which there was a little one / which ye clerk delivered to
the Archbishop. And by and by the Archbishop red this roll co^teinyng this
sentence.

The third sunday after easter the year of our lord.M.CCCC. and seven / William
Thorpe came unto the town of Shrewisbury / and thorough leave granted unto him
to preach: He said openly in saint Chaddis chirche in his sermon / that the
Sacrame^t of the altar after the consecracion was material breed. And ye images
should in no wise be worshipped. And that men should not go on pilgrimages. And
that priests have no title to tithes. And that it is not lefull for to swear in
any wise.

And when the Archbishop had red thus this roll / he rolled it up again / and
said to me. Is this wholesome learning to be among the people?

And I said to him. Sir I am both ashamed on their behalf and right sorrowful
for the^ that have certified you these things thus vntrewly: for I preached
never nor taught thus privily nor apertly.

And the Archbishop said to me. I will give credence to these worshipful men
which have written to me and witnessed under their sealis there among them.
Though thou now deny this: wenist thou yt I will give credence to the? Thou
losel hast troubled ye worshipful cominalte of Shrewisbury / so that the
bailives and cominalte of that town have written to me praying me that am
Archbishop of Canterbury / primate and Chancellor of Englond / that I will
vouchsafe to grant them / that if thou shalt be made (as thou art worthy) to
suffer open Iouresse for thine heresies / that thou may have thy yours openly
there among them: so that all they whom thou and soche other loselles have
there perverted / may thorough fear of thy dede be reconciled again to the
unite of holy church. And also they that stand in true faith of holy church may
thorough thy dede be more stablisshed therein. And as if this asking had
pleased the Archbishop / he said. By my thrift this hearty prayoure and fervent
request shall be thought on.

But certainly another the prayer of the men of Shrewisbery / nor the
manassynge of the Archbishop made me any thing a frayed. But in rehearsing of
this malice and in the hearing of it my heart greatly rejoiced and yet doth. I
thank god for the grace that I than thought and yet think shall come to all the
chirche of god here thorough / by the special merciful doing of the lord. And
as having no dread of the malice of tyrants / by trusting steadfastly in the
help of the lord with full purpose for to knowledge the sothefastnesse / and to
stand thereby after my conning and power I said to the Archbishop. Sir if the
truth of gods word might now be accepted as it should be / I dout not to prove
by likely evidence / that they that are famed to be out of the faith of holy
church in Shrewisbery and in other places also are in the true faith of holy
chirche. For as their words sound / and their works show to ma^nis iugeme^t
dreading and loving faithfully god their will / their desire / their love / and
their baseness are most set to dread to offend god / and to love for to please
him in true and faithful keeping of his commandments. And again they yt are
said to be in the faith of holy chirche in Shrewisbery and in other places / by
open evidence of their proud / envious / malicious / covetous lecherous and
other foul words and works another know nor have will to know nor to occupy
their wits truly and affectuously in the right faith of holy church. Wherefore
all these nor none that follow their manners shall any time come verily in the
faith of holy church / except they enforce them more truly to come in the way
which now they despise. For these men and women that are now called feith full
and holden just / another know nor will exercise them self to know of
faithfulness one commandment of god. And thus full many men and women now / and
specially me^ that are named to be principal limbs of holy church steer god to
great wrath and deserve his curse for that they call or hold them just men
which are full unjust as their vicious words / their great customable swearing
/ and their slau^derouse and shameful works show openly and witness. And
herefor soche vicious men and unjust in their own confusion call them unjust
men and women / which after their power and conning bossy them self to live
iustely after the commandment of god. And where sir ye say / that I have
distrobled the cominalte of Shrewisbery and many other men and women with my
teaching / if it thus be / it is not to be wondered of wise men / syns all the
cominalte of the cite of Jerusalem was destrobled off christ's awne person that
was very god and ma^ and most prudent preacher that ever was or shall be. And
also all the Synagoge of Nazareth was moved against Christ and so fulfilled
with ire towards him for his preaching / that the men of the Synagoge rose up
and cast ch^iste out of their cite / and led him up to the top of a mou^tayne
for to caste him down there hedelinge. Also accordingly hereto the lord
witnessyth by Moses / that he shall put dissension betwixt his people a^d the
people that contraries and persewith his people. Who sir is he yt shall preach
the treuthe of gods word to ye unfaithful people / and shall let the sothe
fastenesse of ye gospel and the prophecy of god almighty to be fulfilled?

And the archbishop said to me. It followed of these thy words / yt thou and
soche other thi^kest yt ye do right well for to preach and teach as ye do
without authority of any bishop. For ye presume / that ye lord hath chosen you
only for to preach as faithful disciples and special folowars of Christ

And I said. Sir by authority of gods law and also of saints and doctors I am
learned to deem / yt it is every priests office and deutie for to preach besily
frely and truly ye word of god. For no dout every priest should purpose first
in his soul and covett to take ye order of priesthode chiefly for to make
knowe^ to ye people ye word of god after his conning and power approving his
words ever to be true by his virtuous works and for this intent we suppose ye
bishops and other prelates of holy chirch should chefely take and use there
prelacie. And for the same cause / bishops should give to priests their orders.
For bishops should accept no ma^ to priesthode except that he had good will and
full purpose / and were well disposed / and well learned to preach. Wherefore
sir by the bidding of Christ and by example of his most holy living and also by
ye witnessing of his holy apostles and prophets we are bound under full great
peyne to exercise vs after our co^ning and power (as every priest is like wise
charged of god) to fulfil dewly the office of priesthode. We presume not here
of our selfes for to be esteemed ( another in our own reputacio^ nor in none
other man) faithful disciples a^d special folowers of Christ: but sir / as I
said to you before / we deem this by authority chefely of gods word / that it
is ye chief deutie of every priest to bossy them faithfully to make ye law of
god known to his people / and so to comune the co^maundement of god charitably
howe that we may best / where / when / and to whom y^ ever we may is our very
deutie. And for the will and besynesse that we owe of dew debt to do iustely
our office thorough the steyring a^d special help (as we trust) of god / hoping
stedfastely in his mercy / we desire to be the faithful disciples of christ:
and we pray this gracious lord for his holy name / that he make vs able so to
please him with devout prayers and charitable priestly works / that we may
obtain of him to follow him thankfully.

And the Archbishop said to me. Lewd losel where make thou soche vein reasons
to me. Asks not saint Paul / how should priests preach / except they be sent?
But I sent ye never to preach. For thy venomous doctrine is so known thorough
out Englo^d / yt no bishop will admit the for to preach by witnessing of their
letters. Why than lewd idiot willest thou presume to preach / syns thou art not
sent nor licensed of thy sovereign to preach. Saith not saint Paule / that
subictes owe to obeye their souereyns / a^d not only good and virtuous: but
also tyrants that are vicious?

And I said to the archbishop. Sir / as touching your letter of lice^ce or
other bishops / which ye say we should have to witness yt we were able to be
sent for to preach? we know well yt another you sir / nor any other bishop of
this land will grant to vs any soche letters of licence but we should oblige vs
to you and to other bishops by vnlefull oaths for to pass not ye bo^des and
terms which ye sir or other bishops will lymyt to vs. And sins i^ this matter
your terms be some to large / and some to streite we dare not oblige vs thus to
be bou^de^ to you for to keep ye terms / which you will lymitt to vs / as ye do
to friars and soch other preachers: and therefore though we have not your
letter sir nor letters of other bishops write^ with ink vpo^ percheme^t: we
dare not here for leave ye office of preaching / to which preaching all priests
after there co^nyng and power are bound by diverse testimonies of gods law and
off great doctors without any me^cio^ maki^g of bishops letters. For as mekell
as we have take^ vpo^ vs ye office of priesthode (though we are unworthy
thereto) we come and purpose to fulfil it with ye help of god by authority of
his own law / and by witness of great doctors and saints accordingly hereto
trusting steadfastly in ye mercy of god. For yt he commands vs to do the office
of priesthode / he will be our sufficient letters and witness / if we by
example of his holy living and teaching specially occupy vs faithfully to do
our office justly / ye ye people to whom we preach / be they faithful or
unfaithful shall be our letters yt is our witness berers. For ye treuthe where
it is sown may not be vnwitnessed. For all that are converted and saved by
learning of gods word and by working thereafter are witness berers / yt the
trewith and sothfastnesse which they harde and did after is cause off their
salvation. And again / all unfaithful me^ and wome^ which herd the treuthe told
out to the^ and would not do there after: also all they that might have herd
the treuthe and wold not hear it / because that they would not do thereafter /
all these shall bear witness against them selfes / and the treuth which they
wold not hear / or else harden and despised to do thereafter thorough their
unfaithfulness: is and shall be cause of their da^pnacion. Therefore sir / syns
this forseide witnessing of god and of diverse saints and doctors / and off all
ye people good and evil suffices to all true preachers: we think that we do not
ye office of presthode / if that we leave our preaching / because yt we have
not or may not have dewly bishops letters to witness that we are sent of the^
to preach. This sentence approves saint Paul / whe^ he speaks of him self and
of faithful apostles and disciples saing thus. We neade no letters of
co^me^dacion as some other preachers do / which preach for covetousness of
te^porall goods a^d for me^nes praising. And where ye say sir yt paul bids
subjects obey their souereyns / this is soth / and may not be denied. But there
is.ij. manner of souereyns / virtuous suffere^ys and vicious tyrau^tes.
Therefore to these last souereyns another me^ nor wome^ yt be subject owe to
obey i^.ij. manners To virtuous suffereins and charitable / subictes owe to
obey wilfully and gladly / in heari^g of their good cou^sell / i^ co^senti^g to
their charitable biddinges / and in working after their frutefull works This
sentence Paul approves where he saith thus to subjects. Be ye mindful of your
souereyns that speak to you the word of god / and follow you the feithe of them
whose conversation you know to be verteuous. For as Paul saith after / these
souereyns to whom subjects owe to obeye in following of their manners / work
besily in holy studiyng / how they may withstand a^d destroy vices first in
themself / and after in all their subjects / and how they may bes^e plant in
them virtues. Also these souereyns make devout and fervent prayers for to
purchase grace of god / that they a^d their subjects may over all thing dread
to offend him and to love for to please him. Also these souereyns to whom Paul
bids vs obey as it is seid before live so virtuously that all they that will
live well may take of them good example to know and to keep the commaundmentis
of god. But in this foresaid wise / subjects owe not to obeye nor to be
obedient to tyrants / while they are vicious tyrants / syns their will / their
counsel / their biddingis / a^d their works are so vicious that they owe to be
hatid and left. And though soche tyrants be masterful and cruel in bostyng a^d
menacing in oppressions and diverse punysshyngis: saint Pettier bids the
servants of soche tyrau^tis to obey mekely to soche tyrants / suffering
patiently their malicious cruelnes. But Pettier counsellith not any servant or
subject to obey to any lord or prince or sovereign in any thing that is not
pleasing to god.

And the Archbishop said unto me. If a sovereign bid his subject doo that thing
that is vicious / this sovereign herein is to blame: but the subject for his
obedience deserves mede of god For obedie^ce pleasith more to god than any
sacrifice.

And I said. Samuel the prophet said to Saul the wickyd king / yt god was more
pleased with the obedience of his commandment than with any sacrifice of
bestis. But Dauid saith / and saint Paul / and saint Gregory accordingly to
gender / that not only they yt doo evil is worthy of death a^d dampnacion: but
also all they that consent to evil doers. And sir ye law of holy chirche
teaches in the decrees / that no servant to his lord / nor child to the father
or mother / nor wife to her husbond / nor monk to his abot ought to obey except
in lefull things and lawful.

And the Archbishop said to me. All these allegingis that thou bring forth are
not else but proud presumptuousness. For hereby thou enforce the to prove /
that thou and soche other are so just / that ye owe not to obeye to prelates.
And thus against the learning of saint Paul yt teaches you not to preach but if
ye were sent / of your own authority ye will go forth and preach and doo what
ye list.

And I said. Sir / presentith not every priest the office of the apostles / or
the office of the disciples of Christ? And the Archbishop said ye. And I said.
Sir as the tenth chaptre of Matthew and the last chaptre of Mark witnesses /
Christ sent his apostles for to preach. And the tenth chaptre of Luke witnesses
that Christ sent his two and seventy disciples for to preach in every place
that Christ was to come to. And saint Gregory in the common law saith / that
every man that goth to priesthode takes upon him the office of preaching: for
as he saith / that priest steirith god to great wrath of whose mouth is not
herd ye voice of preaching And as other more glosses upon Ezechiel witness /
that ye priest that prechith not besily to the people shall be part taker of
their dampnacion that perisshe thorough his defaute: and though ye people
besaid by other special grace of god tha^ by ye priestis preaching / yet the
priestis / in ye they are ordenyd to preach and preach not / as before god they
are ma^^ears For as far as in the^ is / soche priests as preach not besily a^d
truly sleeth all ye people gostely in that they with hold from the^ the word of
god that is life and sustenau^ce of me^nis souls. And saint Isidore saith
Priestis shall be da^pnid for wickedness of the people / if they teach not the^
yt are ignora^t: or blame not the^ yt are sinners. For all yt work or baseness
of priestis sta^dith in preaching and teaching that they edify all men as well
by conning of feithe / as by discipline of works / that is virtuous teaching.
And as the gospel witnessith: Christ said in his teaching. I am borne a^d come^
in to this world to bear witness to ye truth and he that is of the truth
hearith my voice. Than sir syns by the word of Christ specially / that is his
voice / priestis are commanded to preach: what so ever priest that it be that
has not good will a^d full purpose to doo thus / and ableth not himself after
his conning and power to doo his office by the example of Christ and of his
apostles / what so ever other thing that he doth displeasith god. For lo saint
Gregory saith / that thing left / that a ma^ is bou^de chefely to doo / what so
ever other thing that a man doth / it is unthankful to ye holy goste: and
therefore saith Lincoln. That priest that preachith not ye word of god though
he be siene to have none other defaute / he is Antichriste and Sathanas / a
night thief / and a day thief / a slear of souls and an angel of light toornid
in to darkness Wherefore sir / these authorites and other well considered / I
deem my self da^pnable / if Iother for pleasure or displeasure of any creature
apply me not dilige^tly to preach the word of god. And in the same dampnacio^ I
deem all those priestis which of good purpose and will enforce them not besily
to doo thus / and also all them that have purpose or will to let any priest of
this baseness.

And the Archbishop said to those three clerkis yt stood before him. Lo sirs /
this is ye manner and baseness of this losel a^d soche other to pike out soche
sharpe sentences of holy scripture and of doctoris to maintain their sect and
lore against ye ordinance of holy chirche. And therefore losel it is that thou
covet to have again the psalter that I made to betakyn from yt at Ca^turbery /
to record sharpe versys a gei^st vs. But thou shalt never have that psalter /
nor none other book / till that I know that thy heart and thy mouth accord
fully to be governed by holy chirche.

And I said. Sir all my will and power is and ever shall be (I trust to god) to
be gouernyd by holy chirche

And the Archbishop asked me / what was holy chirche.

And I said / sir I told you before / what was holy chirche: but syns ye ask me
this demand: I call Christ and his seyntis holy chirche.

And the Archbishop said unto me. I wot well that Christ and his seyntis are
holy chirche in heuene / but what is holy chirche in earth?

And I said. Sir though holy chirche be every one i^ charity / yet it has two
partis. The first and principal part hath over come perfitely all the
wretchedness of this life / and reigns joyfully in heuene with Christ. And the
tother part is here yet in earth / besily and continually fighting day and
night against temptacions of the fend / forsaking and hating the prosperity of
this world / despising and withstonding their flesschely lusts / which only are
ye pilgrims of Christ / wandering toward heuene by steadfast feithe / and
grounded hope / and by perfect charity. For these heavenly pilgrims may not /
nor will not be let of their good purpose by the reason of any doctors
discording fro holy scripture / nor by the fluddis of any tribulacio^ temporal
/ nor by the wind of any pride of boste or of menacing of any creature / for
they are all fast grounded upon the suer stone Ch^iste / hearing his word and
loving it / exercising the^ faithfully and continually in all their wits to doo
there after.

And the Archbishop said to his clerkis. Se ye not how his heart is endured /
and how he is trailed with ye devil / occupiyng him thus basely to allege soche
sentences to maintain his errors and heresies? Certain thus he wold occupy vs
here all day / if we wold suffer him.

One of the clerks answered. Sir / he said right now that this Certification
that came to you fro shrewisbery is vntrewly forged against him. Therefore Sir
/ oppose you him now here in all the poi^tis which are certified against him
and so we shall hear of his own mouth his answers / and witness them.

And the Archbishop took the certificacio^ in his honda / and looked thereon a
while / and than he said to me.

Lo here it is certified against the by worthy men and faithful of Shrewisbery
yt thou preachedst there openly in saint Chaddis chirche / that the Sacrame^t
of the altar was material breed after the consecracion. What say thou? Was this
truly preached?

And I said / Sir I tell you truly that I touchid nothing there / of the
Sacrament of ye altar / but in this wise / as I will with goddis grace tell you
here. As I stood there in ye Pulpit / besiyng me to teach ye commandment of god
/ there knylled a sacring bell / a^d therefore mekill people toornid away
hastily / and with great noise ran fro towardis me. And I saying this said to
them thus. Good men ye were better to stand here still and to hear goddis word.
For certis ye virtue and the mede of the most holy Sacrament of ye altar stands
mekill more in ye believe thereof / yt ye ought to have in your soul / tha^ it
doth in ye outward sight thereof. And therefore ye were better to stand still
quietely to hear goddis word / because ye thorough ye hearing the rof men come
to very true belefe. And other wise sir I am certain I spake not there / of the
worthy Sacrament of the altar.

And the Archbishop said to me. I believe the not what so ever thou say / syns
so worshipful men have witnessed thus against the. But syns thou deny that thou
saidist thus there / what say thou now? Restith there / after the consecracion
in the oft material breed or no?

And I said / Sir / I know in no place in holy scripture / where this term /
material breed / is written: and therefore Sir when I speak of this matter / I
use not to speak of material breed.

Than the Archbishop said to me. How teach thou men to believe in this
sacrament?

And I said / Sir as I believe myself so I teach other men.

He said / tell out plainly thy believe hereof.

And I said with my protestacio^. Sir I believe that the night / before yt
Christ Iesu wold suffer wilfully passion for man kind on ye morn after / he
toke bread in his holy and most worshipful handis lifting up his eyes / a^d
giving thankis to god his father / blessed this bread and brake it / and gave
it to his disciples saying to them. Take and eat of this all you? This is my
body: And that this is a^d ought to be all mennis belefe Matthew / Mark / Luke
/ and Paul witnessith. Other believe sir have I none / nor will have / nor
teach / for I believe yt this suffices in this matter. For in this believe with
goddis grace I purpose to live and dye / knoleging as I believe and teach other
men to believe / that the worshipful sacrame^t of the altar / is the sacrament
of Christ's flesh a^d his blood in form of bread and of wine.

And the Archbishop said to me. It is sothe that this Sacrament is very
Christ's body inform of bread. But thou and thy secrete chest it to be
substau^ce of breed. Think you this true teaching?

And I said. Another I nor any other of the sect that ye dampne / teach any
other wise tha^ I have told you / nor believe other wise / to my knowing.
Nevertheless sir I ask of you for charity / that ye will tell me here plainly /
how ye shall vnderstonde this text of saint Paule / where he saith thus. This
thing feale you in your self that is in Christ iesu / while he was in the form
of god. Sir / calls not Paule here the form of god / the substance or kind of
god? Also Sir: saith not the chirche in the hours of the most blessed virgin
accordi^ly hereto / where it is written thus. Thou actor of health remember /
that sometime thou toke of the undefiled virgin the form off our body. Tell me
for charity therefore / whether the form of our body be called here the kind of
our body or no?

And the Archbishop said to me. Would thou make me to declare this text after
thy purpose / syns the chirche has now determined / yt there abides no
substance of bread after the consecracion in the sacrament of the altar?
Beleuest thou not on this ordinance off the church?

And I said. Sir what soever prelates have ordened in the church: our believe
stands ever whole. I have not herd that the ordinance off men under believe /
should be putt in to believe. And the Archbishop said to me. If thou hast not
learned this before / learn now to know yt thou art out of believe: if in this
matter and other thou beleuest not as holy chirche believes. What say doctors
treating of this sacrament?

And I said. Sir saint Paule yt was a great doctor of holy chirche speaking to
the people and teaching them the right believe of this most holy sacrament
calls it bread that we break. And also in the Canon of the mass after the
consecracion / this most worthy sacrame^t is called holy bread. And every
priest in this la^de after that he has received this sacrament says in this
wise. That thing that we have taken with our mouth / we pray god that we may
take it with a pure and clean mind. That is as I vnderstonde / we pray god /
that we may receive thorough very believe this holy sacrament worthily. And sir
saint Augustine saith. That thing that is scene is bread: but that mennys
feithe asks to be informed of / is very christ's body. And also Fulgence an
ententyfe doctor saith. As it were an error to say that Christ was but a
substance / that is very ma^ and not very god / or to say that Christ was very
god and not very man / so is it (this doctor saith) an error to say / that the
sacrament of the altar is but a substance. And also sir accordingly hereto in
ye secrete of ye mid mass on Christ mass day it is write^ thus. Item refulsit
deus / sic terrena substa^cia nobis co^ferat quoth sir with ye secrete of ye
forth fery quatuor temporu^ septembris. I pray you sir declare here openly in
english.

And the Archbishop said to me. I perceive well enough where about thou art /
and how ye devil blyndeth the / yt thou may not vnderstond ye ordinance of holy
church / nor consent thereto. But I command the now answer me shorly. Beleuest
thou that after ye co^secracio^ of this forsaid sacrament there abides
substance off bread or not?

And I said. Sir as I vnderstond it is all one to grau^te or to believe / yt
there dwells substance of bread / and to grau^te and to believe / yt this most
worthy sacrame^t of christ's own body is one accide^t without subject. But sir
for as me kill as your asking passes mine vnderstondi^g I dare another deny it
nor grau^te it / for it is skole matter / about which I besyed me never for to
know it: and therefore I co^mit this term / accide^s sine subiecto / to those
clerks which delyre the^ so in curious and suttill sophistry / because they
determine oft so difficult and strau^ge maters / and wade and wa^der so in the^
/ fro^ argume^t to argume^t with pro and co^tra / till yt they wot not where
they are nor vnderstonde not the^selfe. But ye shame that these proud
sophistrers have to yield them to men and before men makes them oft fools / and
to be concluded shamefully before god.

And the Archbishop said to me. I purpose not to oblige the to the suttyll
argume^tes of clerks / syns thou art unable thereto: But I purpose to make the
obeye to the determination of holy church.

And I said. Sir by open evidence and great witness a thousand year after the
i^carnacio^ of Christ ye determinacio^ which I have here before you rehearsed
was accept of holy church as sufficient to the salvation of all them that would
believe it faithfully and work thereafter charitably. But sir the determination
of this matter which was brought in syns the fend was lost by friar Thomas
again / specially calling ye most worshipful sacrament of Christ's own body an
accident without subject / which term syns I know not that gods law approves it
in this matter I dare not grant / but utterly I deny to make this friars
sentence or any soche other my believe / do with me god / what thou wilt.

And the Archbishop said to me. Well / well / thou shalt say other wise or that
I leave the.

But what say thou to this seco^de point yt is recorded against yt by worthy
me^ of Shrewisbury saing yt thou preachedst ope^ly there ye images ought not to
be worshipped in any wise.

And I said. Sir I preached never thus / nor thorough gods grace I will not any
time consent to think nor to say thus another privily nor apertly. For lo / the
lord witnesses by Moses / yt the things which he made were right good / and so
than they were / and yet they are / and shall be good / and worshipful in their
kind. And therefore to the end that god made them to / they are all preisable
and worshipful and specially ma^ that was made after the image and likeness of
god is full worshipful in his kind / ye this holy image that is man / god
worshipped. And herefore every man should worship other in kind / and also for
heavenly virtues that me^ use charitably. Also I say / wood / tynne / gold /
silver / or any other matter that images are made of / all these creatures are
worshipful in their kind and to the end that god made them for. But the keruyng
/ casting / nor peyntyng of any ymagery made with man hand / all be hit that
this doing be accept of man of highest state and dignity / and ordened of them
to be a calendar to lewd men that another can nor will be learned to know god
in his word / another by his creatures nor by his wonderful and diverse
worki^ges: yet this ymagery ought not to be worshipped in the form nor in the
likeness of man craft / nevertheless that every matter yt peinters peynte with
/ syns it is gods creature ought to be worshipped in the kind / and to ye end
yt god made and ordened it to serve man.

Than ye archbishop said to me. I grant well that no body owes to do worship to
any soche images for the^ self. But a crucifix ought to be worshipped for the
passion of christ that is peynted there in and so brought there thorough to man
mind: and thus the images of the blessed trinity / a^d of virgin Mary christ's
mother / and other images of saints ought to be worshipped. For lo earthely
kings and lords which use to send their letters ensealid with their arms or
with their privy signet to men that are with them / are worshipped of these
me^. For wha^ these me^ receive their lords letters in which they se and know
the wills and biddi^ges of their lords / in worship of their lords they do of
their caps to these letters. Why not than / sins in images made with man hand /
we may rede and know many diverse things of god / and of his saints / shall we
not worship their images?

And I said with my forsaid protestacyon. I say that these worldly usages of
temporal lords that ye speak now of / may be done in case without sin / but
this is no similitude to worship images made by ma^nes hand / syns yt Moses /
Dauid / Solomon / Baruch / and other saints in the bible forbid so plainly ye
worshipping of all soche images.

Than the archbishop said to me. Lewd losel In the old law before that christ
toke ma^kind was no likeness of any person of ye trinity another showed to ma^
nor knowe^ of ma^: but now syns christ became ma^ / it is lefull to have images
to show his ma^hode. Ye though many me^ which are right great clerks and other
also held it an error to peynte ye trinity. I say it is well done to make and
to peynte the trinity in images. For it is great moving of devotion to me^ to
have and to behold the trinity and other images of saints caruyd / caste / and
peynted. For beyond the see are the best peynters that ever I saw. And sirs / I
tell you this is their manner a^d it is a good manner. When that an image maker
shall kerue / caste in mold / or peynte any images / he shall go to a priest
and shrive him as clean / as if he should than dye and take penance / and make
some certain vow of fasting or of praying / or of pilgrimages doing / praying
the priest / specially to pray for him / that he may have grace to make a fair
and a devout image.

And I said. Sir I dout not / if these peynters that ye speak of or any other
peynters understood truly the text of Moses / of Dauid / of the wise man / of
Baruch and of other saints and doctors / these peynters should be moved to
shrive them to god with full inward sorrow of heart / taking upon them to doo
right sharpe penance for the sinful and vain craft of peyntinge / karuynge or
casting that they had used / promising god faithfully never to do so after /
knowleging openly before all me^ their reprouable earni^g. And also sir these
priests yt shrive (as ye do say) peinters and enjoin the^ to do penance / and
pray for their speed promising to them help of their prayers for to be curious
in their sinful crafts: sin herein more grievously tha^ the peynters. For these
priests do comfort and give them counsel to do that thing / which of great
peyne / ye / under the peyne of gods curse they should utterly forbid them. For
cerris sir / if the wonderful working of god and the holy living and teaching
off Christ and off his apostles and prophets were made known to the people by
holy living and true and bossy teaching of priests: these things ( sir) were
sufficient books and calendars to know god by and his saints without any images
made with man hond: but certis the vicious living of priests and their
covetousness are chief cause of this error and all other viciousness that
reigns among the people.

Than the archbishop said unto me. I hold yt a vicious priest and a cursed /
and all the^ that are of thy sect: for all priests of holy chirche / and all
images that move men to devotion / thou and soche other go about to destroy.
Loosell / ware it a feire thing to come in to a chirche / and see therein none
image?

And I said. Sir they that come to the church for to pray devoutly to the lord
god may in their inward wits be ye more fervent / that all their outward wits
be closed fro all outward saying and hearing and fro all distroblau^ce and
lettyngis. And syns Christ blessed them yt saw him not bodily / and have
beleuyd feith fully in him: It suffices than to all men thorough hearing and
knowing of goddis word / and to doo there after for to believe in god / though
they see never images made with mannis hand after any Person of the trinity or
of any other saint.

And the Archbishop said to me with a ferue^t spirit. I say to ye Losel / that
it is right well done to make and to have an image of the trinity Ye what say
thou? Is it not a steering thing to behold soche an image?

And I said. Sir ye said right now that in ye old law or Christ toke mankind /
no likeness of any person of the trinity was shewid to men: wherefore sir ye
said it was not tha^ lefull to have images / but now ye say syns Christ is
becomen man / it is lefull to make and to have an image of the trinity and also
of other seyntis. But sir this thing would I learn of you. Syns the father of
heaven / ye and every person of the trinity was without beginning god almighty
/ and many holy prophetis that were dedely men were martiresed violently in the
old law / and also many men and women than died holy confessors Why was it not
than as lefull and necessary as now to have made an image of the father of
heaven / and to have made and had other images of martires / prophetis / and
holy co^fessours to have ben kalendaris to advise men a^d move them to devotion
/ as ye say that images now doo?

And ye Archbishop said. The sinagoge of Eves had not authority to approve
these things as ye chirche of Christ has now.

And I said. Sir saint Gregory / was a great man in ye new law / and of great
dignity / a^d as ye common law witnesses / he co^mendid greatly a bishop / in
yt he forbad utterly ye images made with mannis hand should be worshipped.

And ye Archbishop said. Ungracious losel thou fauerist nomore truth than an
hound / Syns at ye rood at ye north door at London / at our lady at walsingam
a^d many other diverse placis in England are many great and preisable miracles
done: should not the images of soche holy seyntis and placis at ye reverence of
god and our lady and other seyntis be more worshipped than other placis and
images where no soche miracles are done?

And I said. Sir there is no soche virtue in any ymagery that any images should
herefore be wors^hippid / wherefore I am certain yt there is no miracle done of
god in any place in earth because that any images made with ma^nis ha^de should
be worshipped. And herefore sir as I preached openly at shrewisbery and other
placis I say now here before you / yt no body should trust that there war any
virtue in ymagery made with mannis hand / and herefor no body should vow to
them / nor seake them nor kneel to them nor bow to them / nor pray to them /
nor offer any thing to them / nor kiss them / nor ensence them. For lo the most
worthy of soche images / the brazen serpent by Moyses made / at goddis bidding.
The good king Ezechie destroyed worthily and thankfully: for because it was
incensed. Therefore sir if men take good heed to the writing and to the
learning of saint Augustine of saint Gregory and of saint Iohn Crisostome / a^d
of other seyntis and doctors how they speak and write of miracles that shall be
done now in ye last end of ye world: it is to dread yt for ye vnfeith fullness
of men and women the fend hath great power for to work many of ye miracles yt
now are done in soche placis. For both men and women delight now more for to
hear and know miracles / than they doo to know goddis word or to hear it
effec^uously. Wherefore to ye great co^fusion of all the^ yt thus doo: Christ
saith. The gna^cio^ of aduolteres requires tokyns / miracles and wo^ders. Never
thelesse as diverse seyntis say / now when ye feithe of god is published in
christe^dome / ye word of god suffices to ma^nis saluacio^ without soche
miracles: and thus also ye word of god suffices to all faithful me^ and wome^
without any soche images / but good sir / syns ye father of heue^ yt is god in
his godhed is ye most vnknowe^ thi^g yt may be a^d ye most wo^derfull spirit /
having in it no shape or likeness of any me^bres of one dedely creature In what
likeness or what image may god the father be shewid or peintyd?

And the Archhebisshop said. As holy chirche has suffered and yet sufferith the
images of all the trinity and other images to be peyntid and shewid / suffices
to them that are members of holy chirche But syns thou art a rotten membre cut
away from holy chirche thou fairest not the ordinau^ce thereof. But syns the
day passith / leave we this matter.

ANd than he said to me. What say thou to ye third point yt is certified
against the preaching openly in shrewisbery that pilgrimage is not lefull. And
over this thou saidist / that those men and women that go on pilgrimages to
Ca^turbery / to Beuerley / to karlington / to walsingame and to any soche other
placis are acursed and made foolisch spending their goods in waste.

And I said / sir by this certification I am accused to you that I should teach
/ that no pilgrimage is lefull. But I said never thus. For I know that there be
true pilgrimages and lefull and full pleasant to god / and therefore sir how so
ever mine enemies have certified you of me I told at shrewisbery of two manner
of pilgrimages.

And the Archbishop said to me / whom call thou true pilgrims?

And I said. Sir with my protestacio^ I call them true pilgrims travelling
toward ye bliss of heaven which in the state / degre / or ordre ye god calls
them / doo bossy them faithfully for to occupy all their wits bodily and
gostely to know truly and to keep faithfully the biddinges of god / hating and
fleing all the seven dedely sins and every branch of the^ rolling them
verteuously (as it is said before) with all their wits / doing discreetly
wilfully and gladly all the works of mercy bodily and gos^ely after their
conning and power / ablyng them to the gifts of the holy goste disposing them
to receive in their souls and to hold therein the right blessings of Christ
beseyng them to know a^d to keep the seuene principal virtues / and so tha^
they shall obtain here thorough grace for to use thankfully to god all the
conditions of charity / and than they shall be moouyd with the good spirit of
god for to examine oft and diligently their conscience / that another wilfully
nor wittingly they err in any article of believe / having continually (as
frailty will suffer) all their baseness to dread and to flee the offence of god
/ a^d to loo over all thing and to seek ever to doo his pleasant will. Of these
pilgrims I said / what so ever good thought that they any time think: what
verteuous word that they speak: and what frutefull work that they work: every
soche thought / word and work is a steppe nou^bered of god toward him into
heuene. These for said pilgrims of god / delight sore when they hear of seyntis
or of verteuous men and women how they forsook wilfully the prosperity of this
life / how they withstode the suggestion of the fend / how they restrained
their fleschly lusts / how discrete they were in their penance doing how
patient they were in all their aduersites / how prudent they were in consoling
of men and women moouyng them to hate all sin and to fly them / a^d to shame
ever greatly there of and to love all virtues and to draw to them / imagining
how Christ and his folowers by exa^ple of him / suffered skornis and sclaunders
/ and how patiently they abode and toke the wrongful menacing of tyrants / how
homely they were and serviceable to poor men to relieve and comfort them bodily
and gostely after their power and conning / and how devote they were in prayers
/ how fervent they were in heavenly desires / and how they absented them fro
spectacles of vein seyngis and hearingis / and how stable they were to let and
to destroy all vices / a^d how laborious a^d joyful they were to sow and to
plant virtues. These heavenly conditions a^d soche other have ye pilgrims / or
endeavour the^ for to have: whose pilgrimage god acceptith And again I said /
as their works show / the most part of men and women that go now on pilgrimages
have not these forsaid conditions / nor loves to bossy them faithfully for to
have For as I well know syns I have full oft assaide / examine who so ever will
twenty of these pilgrims: and he shall not find three men or women yt know
surely a co^maundme^t of god / nor can say their Pater noster and Aue maria /
nor their Credo readily in any manner of langage. And as I have learned and
also know somewhat by experience of these same pilgrims rellyng the cause / why
that many men and women go hither and thither now on pilgrimages / it is more
for the helthe of their bodies than of their souls / more for to have riches
and prosperity of this world / than for to be e^ryched with virtues in their
souls / more to have here worldely and fleschely friendship / than for to have
friendship of god and of his saints in heaven. For what so ever thing man or
woman doth / the friendship of god nor of any other saint ca^ not be had
without keeping of goddis commaundeme^tis. Forther with my protestacion I say
now as I said in shrewisbery / though they that have fleschely wills travel fer
their bodies and spe^de mekill money to seake and to visit the bonys or images
(as they say they do) of this saint or of yt: soche pilgrimage going is another
praisable nor tha^kefull to god nor to any saint of god: syns in effect all
soche pilgrims despise god and all his co^mau^dme^tis and seyntis. For ye
co^mau^dme^tis of god they will another know nor keep / nor co^forme the^ to
live verteuosly by example of Christ and of his seyntis. Wherefore sir I have
preached and taucht ope^ly / and so I purpose all my life time to do with gods
help / sai^g yt soche fo^de people wast blamefully gods goods in their vein
pilgrimages / spending their goods upon vicious hostelers / which are oft
unclean women of their bodies: and at the lest those goods with the which they
should doo works of mercy after goddis bidding to poor noddy men and women.
These poor mennis goods and their lyuelode these runners about offer to rich
priestis / which have mekill more lyuelode than they neade / And thus those
goods they waste wilfully and spend the^ vniustely against goddis bidding upon
strangers / with which they should help and relive after goddis will their poor
noddy neighbours at home: ye and over this folly / oft times diverse men and
women of these runners thus madly hither a^d thither in to pilgrimage borrow
hereto other mennis goods / ye and some time they steal mennis goods hereto /
and they pay them never again. Also sir I know well that when diverse men and
women will go thus after their own wills and finding out one pilgrimage / they
will orden with them before to have with them both men a^d women that can well
singe wanton songs / and some other pilgrims will have with them bag pipes / so
that every town that they come throw what with the noise of their syngyng / a^d
with the sound of their piping / and with the Iangelyng of their Canterbery
bellis / and with the barking out of dogs after them that they make more noise
than if ye king came there away with all his clarions and many other
menstrelles. And if these men and women be a month out in their pilgrimage /
many of the^ shall be an half year after great iangelers / tale tellers and
liars.

And the Archbishop said to me. Lewd losel thou see not far enough in this
matter / for thou co^siderest not the great travel of pilgremys therefore thou
blame that thing that is praisable. I say to yt that it is right well done /
that pilgremys have with them both syngers and also pipers that when one of
them that goes barfote strikes his too upon a stone a^d hurts him sore / and
makes him to blede: it is well done that he or his fellow begin than a songe /
or else take out of his bosom a baggepype for to drive away with soche mirth
the hurt of his fellow. For with soche salace the travel and werinesse off
pilgrims is lightely and merrily brought forth.

And I said. Sir saint Paule teaches men to weep with them yt weep.

And the archbishop said. What ianglist thou against me^nis deuocio^ / what
soever thou or soch other say / I say that the pilgrimage that now is used is
to the^ that doo it / a praysable and a good mean to come the rather to grace.
But I hold the unable to know this grace: for thou enforsestthe to let ye
devotion of the people: syns by authority of holy scripture men may lefully
have and use soche solace as thou reprouest. For Dauid in his last psalm
teaches me to have diverse instrume^tes of music for to praise there with god.

And I said. Sir by the sentence of diverse doctors expounding the psalms of
Dauid / ye music and menstrelcy that Dauid and other saints of the old law
spake of / owe now another to be taken nor used by the letter / but these
instrume^tes with their music ought to be interpreted gostely: for all those
figures are called virtues and grace / with which virtues men should please god
and praise his name. For saint Paule saith. All soche things befell to them in
figure. Therefore sir I vnderstonde that the letter of this psalm of Dauid /
and of soche other psalms and sentences doth slay them that take the^ now
letterally. This sentence I vnderstond sir Christ approves him self putting out
the menstrelles / or that he would quicken the dead damsel.

And ye archbishop said to me. Lewd losel / is it not lefull to vs to have
organes in ye chirche for to worship therewith all god? And I said

Ye sir by monies ordinance / but by the ordinance of god a good sermon to the
peoples vnderstondyng were mekill more pleasant to god.

And the Archbishop said / that organes and good delectable songe quickened and
sharpened more mennys wits than should any sermon.

But I said. Sir lusty men and worldly lovers delight and coue^e and travel to
have all their wits quickened and sharpened with diverse sensible solace: but
all ye faithful lovers and folowers of Christ have all their delight to hear
goddis word / and to vnderstond it truly / and to work thereafter faithfully
and continually. For no dout to dread to offend god / and to love to please him
in all thing quyckeneth and sharpens all the wits of christ's chosen people:
and ableth the^ so to grace / that they joy greatly to withdraw their ears /
and all their wits a^d members from all worldly delight and from all fleschly
solace. For saint Ierome (as I think) saith. No body may joy with this world
a^d reign with Christ.

And the Archbishop (as if he had ben displeased with mine answer) said to his
clerks. What guess ye this idiot will speak there / where he hath none dread:
syns he speaks thus now here in my prese^ce? Well well / by god thou shalt be
ordened for. And than he spake to me all angrily.

WHat say thou to this forth point / yt is certified against the preaching
ope^ly a^d boldly in Shrewisbery / ye priests have no title to tithes.

And I said. Sir I named there no word of tithes in my preaching. But / more
tha^ a month after that I was arrested / there in prison a man came to me in to
the prison asking me what I said of tithes. And I said to him. Sir in this town
are many clerks and priests of which some are called religious me^ though many
of them be seculers. Therefore askeye off them this question. And this man said
to me. Sir our prelates say / that we are also obliged to paye our tithes of
all things that renew to vs / and that they are acursed / yt with draw any part
wittingly fro them of their tithes. And I said ( sir) to that man / as with my
protestacyon I say now here before you: that I had wonder that any priest dare
say / men to be acursed with out ground of goddis word. And ye ma^ said. Sir
our priests say that they curse me^ thus by authority of gods law. And I said.
Sir I know not where this sentence of cursing is authorised now in the bible.
And therefore sir I pray you that ye will ask the most conni^g clerk of this
town / that ye may know where this sentence cursing them that tithe not now is
written in gods law: for if it were written there I would right gladly be
learned where. But shortly this man would not go from me / to ask this question
of a another body / but required me there / as I would answer before god / if
in this case the cursing of priests were laufull and approved of god. And
shortly herewith came to my mind the learning of saint Peter / teachi^g priests
specially to hollow ye lord christ in their hearts: being evermore ready (as
far as in the^ is) to answer thorough faith and hope to the^ yt ask of the^ a
reaso^. And this lesson Peter teaches me^ to use with a meke spirit and with
dread of ye lord. Wherefore sir / I said to this man in this wise. In the old
law which endyd not fully till the time yt christ rose up again fro death to
life) god commanded tithes to be gyue^ to the leuites for the great besynesse
and daily travel that pertained to their office: But priests / because their
travel was mekyll more easy and light / tha^ was the office of the leuites: god
ordained that priests should take for their lifelode to do their office / ye
tenth part of tho tithes that were geue^ to the leuites. But naw (I said) in
the new law another Christ nor any of his apostles toke tithes of the people /
nor co^maunded the people to pay tithes another to priests / nor to deacons.
But Christ taught the people to do alms / that is works of mercy / to poor
noddy me^ of surpluse / that is superfluous of their temporal goods which they
had more tha^ them needed reasonably to their necessary lyuelode. And thus (I
said) not of tithes / but of pure alms of the people Christ lived and his
apostles / when they were so besyre in teaching off the word of god to the
people that they might not travel other wise for to get their lyuelode. But
after Christ's ascension / and when the apostles had received ye holy goste /
they trailed with their hands for to get their lyuelode / when that they might
thus doo for besye preaching. Therefore by example of himself saint Paule
teaches all the priests of Christ for to travel with their hand / when for
besye teaching of the people they might thus do. And thus all these priests
whose priestehode god accepts now / or will accept or did in the apostles time
/ and after their decease: will do to the worlds end. But (as Cisterciensis
tells) in the thousand year of our lord Iesu Christ / two hundredth and a
leuenth year / one pope the tenth Gregory ordened new / tithes first to be
given to priests now in the new law. But saint Paule in his time whose trace or
example all priests of god enforce them to follow / saying the covetousness
that was among the people desiring to destroy this foul sin thorough the grace
of god / and true vertuouse living and example of himself: wrette and taucht
all priests for to follow him as he followed Christ patiently / willingly and
gladly in hye poverty. Wherefore Paule saith thus. The lord has ordened that
they yt preach the gospel shall live of the gospel. But we (saith Paul) that
covet and bossy vs to be faithful folowers of Christ / use not this power. For
lo (as Paule witnesses afterword) when he was full pore and noddy preaching
among the people: he was not chargeous unto them / but with his hands he
trailed not only to get his own living / but also ye living of other poor and
noddy creatures. And syns the people was never so covetous nor so auarouse (I
guess) as they are now it were good counsel / yt all priests toke good heed to
this heavenly learning of Paul / folowimg him here / in wilful poverty /
nothing charging the people for their bodily lyuelode. But because ye many
priests do contrary Paule in this foresaid doctrine: Paul bids the people take
heed to those priystes that follow him as he had geue^ them example. As / if
Paul would say thus to ye people. Accept ye none other priests than they that
live after the form that I have touched you. For certain in what soever dignity
or ordre that any priest is in / if he conform him not to follow Christ and his
apostles in wilful poverty / and in other heavenly virtues / and specially in
true preaching of gods word: though soche a one be named a priest / yet he is
no more but a priest in name / for the work of a very priest soch a one wants.
This sentence approves Augusttne / Gregory / Chrisostome / and Lincon^ plainly.

And ye archbishop said to me. Think thou this wholesome learning for to sow
openly or yet privily among ye people? Certain this doctrine co^trarieth
plainly ye ordinance of holy fathers which have ordened grau^ted and licenced
priests to be in diverse degres / and to live by tithes and offerings of ye
people and by other doubts.

And I said. Sir / if priests were now in measurable measure and number / and
lived virtuously / and taucht besyly and truly the word of god by example of
Christ and of his apostles: withouten tithes / offerings / and other dewties yt
priests now challenge and take / y^ people would give the^ frely sufficient
lyuelode.

And a clerk said to me. How wilt thou make this good that ye people will give
frely to priests their lyuelode / syns yt now by ye law every priest ca^
scarcely co^strayne ye people to give the^ their lyuelode?

And I said. Sir it is now no wonder though the people grudge to give prestos
the lyuelode that they ask: for mekill people know now how that priests should
live / a^d how that they live contrary to Christ and to his apostles. And
therefore the people is full heavy to paye (as they do) their temporal goods to
persons a^d to other vicars and priests / which should be faithful
dispensatours of the pareshes goods taking to themselves nomore but a scarce
lyui^g of tithes nor of offerings by the ordinance of the common law. For what
soever priests take of the people: be it tithe or offering or any other deutie
or service: the priests ought not to have thereof nomore but a bare living /
a^d to depart the residew to the poor men and women specially of the parish /
of whom they take this temporal living. But the most del of priests now wastes
their pareshes goods a^d spends the^ at their own will after the world in their
vein lusts / so that in few places poor me^ have dewly (as they should have)
their own sustenance / another of tithes nor of offerings / nor of other large
wages and foundacions yt priests take of ye people in diverse manners aboue it
that they need for needful sustenance of meat and clothinge. But ye poor noddy
people are forsaken and left of priestis to be susteinyd of ye paroshenis / as
if the priestis toke nothing of ye paroshenis / for to help ye poor people
with. And thus sir into over great charges of the paroshenis they pay their
te^porall goods twice / where ones might suffice / if priestis were true
dispensatours. Also sir the paroshenis that pay their te^porall goods (be they
tithes or offerings) to priestis that doo not their office among them iustely /
are parteners of every sin of those priestis: because that they sustain those
priestis folly in their sin with their te^porall goods. If these things be well
considered what wonder is it than sir / if the paroshenis grudge against these
dispensatours?

Than the Archbishop said to me. Thou y^ sholdeist be judged and reulyd by holy
chirche / presumptuously thou demest holy chirche to have erryd in the
ordinance of tyhes a^d other dewties to be paid to pristis. Yt shall be long or
thou thryue Losel / that thou despicest thy gostely mother. How darist thou
speak this Losel among the people? Are not tithes geuyn to priestis for to live
by?

And I said. Sir saint Paul saith that tithes were given in the old law
toleuytes a^d to priestis / that came of the lynage of Leui / But our priest he
saith came not of the lynage of Leui / but of ye lynage of Iuda: to which Iuda
no tithes w^re promised to be geuyn. And therefore Paul saith / syns the
priesthode is chau^ged fro the generation of Leui to the generation of Iuda /
it is necessary yt changing also be made of ye law. So yt priestis live now
without tithes and other dewties yt they now claim / following Christ and his
apostles in wilful poverty / as they have given them example. For syns Christ
lived all ye time of his preaching by pure almose of the people / and by
example of him his apostles lived in ye same wise / or else by the travel of
their ha^dis / as it is said aboue Every priest whose priesthode Christ
approuyth knowith well / and confessith in word / and in work that a disciple
owith not to be aboue his master / but it suffices to a disciple to be as his
master / simple / and pure / meke and patient: and by exa^ple specially of his
master Christ / every priest should roll him in all his living / and so after
his conning and power a priest should bossy him to inform and to roll whom so
ever he might charitably.

And the Archbishop said to me with a great spirit Goddis curse have thou and
mine for this teaching: for thou would hereby make ye old law more fre a^d
perfect than the new law. For thou say that it is lefull to leuites and to
priestis to take tithes in the old law / and so to enjoy their priuelegies: but
to vs priestis in the new law thou say it is not lefull to take tyhes. And thus
thou geuist leuytes of the old law more freedom than to priestis of the new law

And I said. Sir I marvel / that ye vnderstonde this plain text of Paul thus.
Ye wot well / that the leuites and priests in the old law that toke tithes were
not so fre nor so perfect as Christ and his apostles that took no tithes And
sir there is a doctor (I think yt it is saint Ierome) that saith thus. The
priestis that challenge now in the new law tithes / say in effect / that Christ
is not becomen man / nor that he hath yet suffered death for mannis love.
Wherefore this doctor saith this sentence. Syns tithes were the hires and wages
limited to leuites and to priests of the old law for bearing about of the
tabernacle / and for fleayng and fleayng of beasts / and for burning of
sacrifice / a^d for keeping of the temple / and for tromping of battle before
the ost of Israel / and other diverse obseruauncis that perteinyd to their
office: those priestis that will challenge or take tithes: deny that Christ is
come in flesh and doo ye priestis office of the old law for whom tithes were
grau^ted: for else (as this doctor saith) priestis take now tithes wrongfully.

And the Archbishop said to his clerks. Herd ye ever losel speak thus? Certain
this is the learning of them all / yt where so ever they come / and they may be
suffered / they enforce them to expugne the freedom of holy chirche.

And I said. Sir why call you the taking of tithes and of soche other dewties
that priests challenge now wrongfully the freedom of holy chirche: Syns another
Christ nor his apostles challenged nor took soche dewties. Herefore these
takyngis of priestis now are not called iustely the freedom of holy chirche /
but all soche giving and taking ought to be called and holden the sclaunderous
covetousness of men of ye holy chirche.

And the Archbishop said to me. Why Losel wilt not thou and other that are
confedered with the / seake out of holy scripture and of the sente^ce of
doctors all sharpe authorites age^st lords and knights and squyeris and against
other secular men / as thou doeste against priests?

And I said. Sir what so ever men or wome^ lords or ladies or any other that
are present in our preaching specially or in our co^munyng after our conning we
tell out to the^ their office a^d their charges: but sir syns Chrisostome saith
yt priestis are the stomach of ye people / it is needful in preaching and also
in communing / to be most bossy about this priesthode / syns by the viciousness
of priestis both lords and commons are most sinfully infected and led into the
worst. And because that ye covetousness of priestis / and pride and the boste
yt they have and make of their dignity and power / destroyed not only the
virtues of priesthode in priestis them self but also over this / it stierith
god to take great ve^geaunce both upon lords and upon commons which suffer
these priests charitably

And the Archbishop said to me. Thou judge every priest proud yt will not go
arrayed as thou dost. By god I deem him to be more meke that god every day in a
scarlet gown / than thou in ye thread bare blew gown. Whereby know thou a proud
man?

And I said. Sir a proud priest may be known when he denies to follow Christ /
and his apostles in wilful poverty and other virtues and couerith worldly
worship / and takes it gladly / and gatherith to gender with pletyng menacing /
or with flattering or with simony any worldly goodis: and most if a priest
bossy him not chefely in himself and after in all other men and women after his
conning a^d power to withstond sin.

And the Archbishop said to me. Though thou knew a priest to have all these
vices / a^d though thou saw a priest lovely lye now by a woman knowing his
fleschly: would thou herfore deem this priest damnable? I say to the that in
the turning about of thy hand soche a sinner may be verily repented.

And I said. Sir I will not da^pne any ma^ for any sin that I know done or may
be done / so that the sinner leuyth his sin. But by authority of holy scripture
/ he that synneth thus openly as ye show here / is da^pnable for doing of soche
a sin / and most specially a priest that should be example to all other for to
hate a^d fly sin: and in how short time yt ever ye say that soche a sinner may
be repented: he owes not of him that knows his sinning to be judged verily
repentant / without open evidence of great shame and hearty sorrow for his sin.
For who so ever and specially a priest that uses pride / envy / covetousness /
lechery / simony / or any other vices: and shewith not as opine evidence of
repentance as he hath given evil example and occasion of sinning / if he
continue in any soche sin as long as he may / it is likely that sin leaves him
/ and he not sin / a^d as I vnderstonde soche a one / synneth unto death / for
whom no body owes to pray / as saint Iohn saith

And a clerk said than to the Archbishop. Sir the longer that ye oppose him /
the worse he is: and the more that ye bossy you to amend him the waiwarder he
is: for he is of so shrewd a kind / that he shamyth not only to be himself a
foul nest: but without shame he beseech him to make his nest fouler.

And the Archbishop said to his clerke^ Suffer a while / for I am at an end
with him for there is one other point certified against him / and I will hear
what he saith thereto.

ANd so than he said to me. Lo it is here certified against the / that thou
preachidst openly at shrewisbery / that it is not lefull to swear in any case.

And I said. Sir I preached never so openly / nor I have not touched in this
wise in any place. But sir as I preached in shrewisbery / with my protestacion
I say to you now here: yt by the authority of ye gospel a^d of saint Iames and
by witness of diverse seyntis and doctors I have preached openly in one place
or other that it is not lefull in any case to swear by any creature. And over
this sir I have also preached a^d touched by ye forsaid authorites yt no body
should swear in any case / if yt without other in any wise he yt is charged to
swear might excuse him to the^ yt have power to compel him to swear in lefull
thing and laufull. But if a ma^ may not excuse him without other to the^ yt
have power to co^pell him to swear / than he ought to swear only by god /
taking him only yt is sothefastnesse / for to witness the sothefastenesse.

Anb than a Clerk asked me / if it were not lefull to a subject at the bidding
of his prelate for to kneel down and towche the holy gospel book and kiss it
sayng: So help me god and this holy dome / for he should after his conning and
power doo all thing that his prelate commands him. And I said to the^. Sirs ye
speak here full generally or largely What if a prelate commau^ded his subject
to doo an vnlaufull thing / should he obey thereto?

And the Archbishop said to me A subject ought not to suppose that his prelate
will bid him doo an vnlaufull thi^g For a subject ought to think / yt his
prelate will bid him doo nothi^g but yt / he will answer for before god yt it
is lefull: and tha^ though ye bidding of ye prelate be vnliefull / ye subject
hath no apparel to fulfil it syns that he thinks a^d judges that what so ever
thing his prelate bids him doo / that it is lefull to him for to doo it.

And I said. Sir I trust not hereto. But to our first purpose / sir I tell you
yt I was onys in a gentile mannis house / and there war than two clerks there.
A master of divinity / and a man of law / which ma^ of law was also comuning in
divinity. And among other things these me^ spake of oaths / and the man of law
said. At ye bidding of his sovereign which had power to charge him to swear /
he wold lay his hand upon a book and hear his charge / and if his charge to his
vnderstonding were vnlefull / he would hastily with draw his hand from the
book: a^d if he perceived his charge to be lefull he would hold still his hand
upon ye book taking there only god to witness / that he would fulfil that
lefull charge after his power. And the master of divinity said than to him
thus. Certain he that leyeth his hand upon a book in this wise a^d makyth there
a promise to doo that thing that he is commanded / is obliged there / by book
other than to fulfil his charge. For no dout he that charge him to lay his hand
thus upon a book / towching the book and swearing by it / a^d kissing it /
promising in this form to doo this thing or that / will say and witness that he
that towcheth thus a book and kysseth it hath sworn upon that book: and all
other men that see that man thus doo / and also all tho that hear hereof in the
same wise will say and witness / that this man has sworn upon a book /
wherefore the master of divinity said. Yt was not lefull another to give nor to
take any soche charge upon a book / for every book is nothing else but diverse
creatures of which it is made of. Therefore to swear upon a book is to swear by
creatures / and this swearing is ever vnlefull. This sentence witnesses
Chrisostome plainly blaming them greatly that bring forth a book for to swear
upon / charging clerks that in no wise they constrain any body to swear /
whether they think a man to swear true or false.

And the Archbishop and his clerks scorned me and blamyd me greatly for this
saying. And ye Archbishop manassed me with great punishment and sharpe / except
I left this opinion of swearing.

And I said. Sir this is not mine opinion / but it is the opinion of christ our
saviour / and of saint Iamis and of Chrisostome a^d other diverse saints and
doctors.

Than the Archbishop bad a clerk rede this homely of Chrisostome which homely
this clerk held in his hand written in a roll / which roll the Archbishop
caused to be taken fro my fellow at Canterbury: and so than this clerk red this
roll till he came to a clause / where Chrisostome saith / that it is sin to
swear well.

And than a clerk Malueren (as I guess) said to ye archbishop. Sir I pray you
wet of hi^ how yt he vndersto^deth Chrisostome here / saing it to be sin to
swear well.

And so y^ Archbishop asked me how I understood here Chrisostome.

And certain I was somewhat afraid to answer hereto. For I had not besyed me to
study about the sense thereof / but lifting up my mind to god I prayed him of
grace. And as fast as I thought how Christ said to his apostles / wha^ for my
name ye shall be brought before judges I shall give into your mouth wisdom that
your adversaries shall not against say: and trusting faithfully in the word of
god. I said. Sir I know well that many men and women have now swearing so in
custom / that they know not nor will not know that they do euell for to swear
as they do / but they thi^ke and say yt they do well for to swear as they do /
though they know well yt they swear untruly. For they say / they may by their
swearing (though it be false) void blame or temporal harm which they should
have if they swear not thus. And sir many me^ and women maintain strongly that
they swear well when that thing is sothe that they swear for. Also full many
men and women say now / that it is well done to swear by creatures / wha^ they
may not (as they say) otherwise be believed. Annd also full many men and women
now say that it is well done to swear by god / and by our lady / and by other
saints for to have the^ in mind. But syns all these sayings are but excusations
and sin / me thinks sir that his sente^ce of Chrisostome may be alleged well
against all soch swearers / witnessing that all these sin grievously / though
they think themself for to swear in this forsaid wise well. For it is evil done
and great sin for to swear truth when in any manner / a man may excuse hi^ with
out other.

And the archbishop said / that Chrisostome might be thus vnderstonde.

And than a clerk said to me. Wilt thou tarry my lord no longer / but submit
the here mekely to the ordinance of holy chirche and lay thine hand upon a book
touching the holy gospel of god / promising not only with thy mouth but also
with thine heart to stand to my lords ordinance?

And I said. Sir have I not told you here / howe that I herd a master of
divinity say that in soche a case it is all one to touche a book / and to swear
by a book?

And ye archbishop said. There is no master of divinity in Englond so great /
that if he hold this opinion before me / but I shall punish him as I shall do
the / except thou swear as I shall charge the.

And I said. Sir is not Chrisostome an ententyfe doctor?

And the Archbishop said. Ye.

And I said. If Chrisostome proves him worthy great blame that brings forth a
book to swear upon / it must needs follow that he is more to blame that swears
on that book.

And the Archbishop said. If Chrisostome meant accordingly to the ordinance of
holy chirche we will accept him.

And than said a clerk to me. Is not the word of god and god himself
equipollent / that is / off one authority? And I said. Ye.

Than he said to me. Why wilt thou not swear than by the gospel of god / yt is
gods word / syns it is all one to swear by ye word of god / and by god himself.

And I said. Sir / syns I may not now other wise be believed but by swearing I
perceive (as Augustine saith) that it is not spedefull yt ye that should be my
brothern should not believe me: therefore I am ready by the word of god (as the
lord commanded me by his word) to swear.

Than the clerk said to me. Lay than thine ha^de vpo^ ye book touching ye holy
gospel of god and take thy charge.

And I said. Sir I vnderstonde that the holy gospel of god may not be touched
with man hand.

And the clerk said. I fonded / and that I said not truth.

And I asked this clerk whether it were more to read the gospel or to touche ye
gospel.

And he said / it was more to read ye gospel.

Than I said. Sir by authority of saint Ierome the gospel is not the gospel for
reding of ye letter / but for ye believe that men have in ye word of god / that
it is the gospel that we believe / and not the letter yt we rede: for because
the letter yt is touched with man hand is not the gospel / but ye sentence that
is verily believed in ma^nis hart is ye gospel. For so saint Ierome saith The
gospel that is the virtue of gods word is not in ye levies of ye book / but it
is in ye root of reason. Another the gospel (he saith) is in ye writing aboue
of the letters / but the gospel is in the marking of y^ sentence of scriptures.
This sentence approves saint Paule saiynge thus. The kingdom of god is not in
word but in virtue. And Dauid saith. The voice of ye lord that is his word is
in virtue. And after dauid saith. Thorough the word of god / ye heuens were
formed / and in the spirit of his mouth is all the virtue of them. And I pray
you sir / vnderstonde ye well how Dauid saith / that in ye spirit of the mouth
of ye lord is all the virtue of angels and of men?

And the clerk said to me. Thou would make vs to fond with the. Say we not ye
the gospel is are written in ye mass book?

And I said. Sir though men use to say thus / yet it is vnperfyte speech. For
the principal part off a thing is properly the whole thynge^ For lo / man soul
that may not now be scene here / nor touched with any sensible thing is
properly man. And all the virtue of a tree is in the root thereof that may not
be scene / for do away the root / and the tree is destroyed. And sir as ye said
to me right now / god and his word are of one authority / and sir saint Ierome
witnesses that Christ very god and very man is hid in the letter of his law:
thus also sir the gospel is hid in the letter. For sir as it is full likely
many diverse men and women here in the earth touched Christ and saw him and
knew his bodily person which another touched nor saw nor knew gostely his god
heed: right thus sir many men now touche and see / and write and rede the
scriptures of goddis law / which another touche / see nor rede effecctuallye
the gospel. For as the godhede of Christ that is the virtue of god is known by
the virtue thorough belefe / so is the gospel / yt is Christ's word.

And a clerk said to me. These be full misty maters and unsavoury that thou
show here to vs.

And I said. Sir / if ye that are masters know not plainly this sentence ye may
sore dread that the kingdom of heuene be taken fro you / as it was fro the
princes of priests and fro the elders of the jaws.

And than a clerk (as I guess) Malueren said to me. Thou know not thine
equiuocacyons / for the kingdom of heuene has diverse vnderstondinges. What
call thou the kingdom of heuene in this sentence that thou show here?

And I said. Sir by good reason and sentence of doctors y^ realm of heuene is
called here ye vnderstonding of gods word.

And a clerk said to me. From who^ think thou that this vnderstondinge is taken
away?

And I said. Sir by authority of Christ him self the effectual vnderstondinge
of Christ's word is taken away from all them chefely / which are great lettered
men and presume to vnderstonde high things / and will be holden wise men / and
desire mastership and hye stare and dignity / but they will not conform them to
ye living and teaching of Christ and off his apostles.

Tha^ the Archbishop said. Well / well / thou wilt judge thy souereyns. By god
the king doth not his deutie / but he suffer the to be condemned.

And than a another clerk said to me. Why on friday that last was / counseldest
thou a man off my lords / that he should not shrive him to man but only to god?

And with this asking I was abashed / a^d than by and by I knew that I was
suttely betrayed of a man that came to me in prison on the friday before
comunynge with me in this matter of confession / and certain by his words (I
thought) that this man came than to me of full fervent and charitable will: But
now I know he came to tempte me and to accuse me (god forgive him if it be his
will). And with all mine heart when I had thought thus I said to this clerk.
Sir I pray you that ye would fetch this man hither / and all the words as ne'er
as I can repeat them which that I spake to him on friday in the prison I will
rehearse now here before you all and before him.

And (as I guess) the Archbishop said tha^ to me. They yt are now here suffice
to repeat them. How saidest thou to him?

And I said. Sir that man came and asked me of diverse things / and after his*
asking I answered him (as I understood) that good was: and as he showed to me
by his words / he was sorry of his living in court and right heavy for his own
vicious living / and also for the viciousness of other men and specially of
priests evil living: and herefore he said to me with a sorrowful heart) as I
guessed) yt he purposed fully within short time for to leave ye court / and
besye him to know gods law / and to conform all his life thereafter. And when
he had said to me these words and mo other / which I would recherse and he were
present / he prayed me to hear his confession. And I said to him sir /
wherefore come ye to me to be co^fessed of me / ye wot well that the Archbishop
puttith and holds me here as one unworthy other to give or to take any
Sacrament of holy chirche. And he said to me. Brother I wot well a^d so wot
many mo other / that you and soche other are wrongfully vexed / and herefore I
will common with you the more gladly. And I said to him. Certain I wot well
that many me^ of this court and specially the priestis of this household would
be full evil a paid both with you and with me if they wit / that ye were
co^fessed of me And he said that he cared not therefore / for he had full
little affection in them: and (as me tought) he spake these words and many
other of so good will and of so hye desire for to have known and done the
pleasant will of god. And I said than to him as with my fore said protestacion
I say to you now here. Sir I counsel you for to absent you from all evil
company and to draw you to them that loo a^d bossy the^ to know and to keep the
precepts of god: and than the good spirit of god will move you for to occupy
besily all your wits in gathering to gender of all your sins as far as ye can
bethink you / shaming greatly of them and sorrowing heartily for them / ye sir
the holy goste will than put in your heart a good will and a feruen^ desire for
to take and to hold a good purpose to hate ever and to fly (after your conning
and power) all occasion of sin / a^d so than wisdom shall come to you from
aboue / lightening with diverse beams of grace and of heavenly desire all your
wits / informing you how ye shall trust stedfastely in the mercy of the lord
knoulegyng to him only all your vicious living / praying to him ever devoutly
of charitable counsel and co^tinuance / hoping without dout that if ye co^tynew
thus besiyng you feith fully to know and to keep his biddi^gis that he will
(for he only may) forgive you all your sins. And this man said than to me.
Though god forgive men their sins / yet it behoouyth men to be assoyled of
priestis and to doo the penance that they enjoin them. And I said to him. Sir
it is all one to assoyle men of their sins / and to forgive men their sins:
Wherefore syns it perteinyth only to god to forgive sin / Yt suffisith in this
case to counsel men a^d women for to leave their sin / and to comfort the^ that
besye them thus to doo for to hope stedfastely in the mercy of god. And
ageynwarde / priestis ought to tell sharply to customable sinners / that if
they will not make an end of their sin / but continue in diverse sins while yt
they may sin / all soche deserve peyn without any e^de. And herefore priestis
should ever bossy them to live well and holily a^d to reach the people basely
and truly the word of god / shewi^g to all folk in open preaching and in privy
cou^selyng that the lord god only forgeuyth sin. And therefore those priestis
that take vpo^ the^ to assoyle men of their sins / blaspheme god: syns that it
perteinyth only to ye lord to assoyle men of all their sins. For no dout A
thousand year after that Christ was man / no priest of Christ dared take upon
him to teach the people another privily nor a pertly / that they behoouyd nedis
to come to be assoilid of them / as priestis now doo. But by authority of
Christ's word / priestis bou^d endured customable si^ners to everlasting pains
/ which in no time of their living would bossy the^ faithfully to know ye
biddinges of god / nor to keep the^. And again all they that would occupy all
their wits to hate a^d to fly all occasion of sin / dreding over all thing to
offend god / a^d loouyng for to please him co^tinually / to these men and women
/ priestis shewid how ye lord assoileth the^ of all their sins. And thus Christ
promised to conferme in heue^ all ye bindi^g and loosyng / yt priestis by
authority of his word bind me^ in sin yt are endured therein / or loose the^
out of sin here vpo^ earth yt are verily repe^tau^t. And this ma^ heari^g these
words said / yt he might well i^ co^scie^ce co^sent to this sente^ce But he
said / is it not needful to ye lay people yt ca^ not thus doo / to go shrive
the^ to priestis? and I said if a ma^ feale hi^self so distrobled with any
si^ne yt he ca^ not by his own wit avoid this sin without cou^sell of the^ yt
are herein wiser than he In soche a case ye counsel of a good priest is full
necessary. And if a good priest fail as they doo now commonly / in soche a case
saint Augustine saith that a man may lefully common and take counsel of a
verteuous secular man. But certain that man or woman is over laden a^d to
bestely / which can not bring their own sins into their mind / besiyng them
night and day for to hate and to for sake all their sins / doing a sigh for
them after their conning and power. And sir full accordingly to this sentence
upon midlenton sunday two year (as I guess) now agony / I harde a monk of
Feuersam / that men called Moredo^ preach at Ca^terbury at the cross within
Christ chirche Abbey saying thus of confession. As thorough the suggestion of
the fend without cou^sell of any other body that of themself many me^ and women
can imagine and find means and ways enough to come to pride / to theft / to
lechery / and to other diverse vices: In contrary wise this monk said. Syns the
lord god is more ready to forgive sin than the fend is or may be of power to
move any body to sin / than who so ever will shame and sorrow heartily for
their sins / knouleging them faithfully to god / amending them after their
power and conning / without counsel of any other body than of god and himself
thorough the grace of god all soche men and women may find sufficient means to
come to goddis mercy / and so to be clean assoilid of all their sins. This
sentence I said sir to this man of yours and the self words as ne'er as I can
guess.

And the Archbishop said. Holy chirche approuyth not this learning.

And I said. Sir holy chirche of which Christ is head in heuene and in earth
must needs approve this sentence. For lo hereby all men and women may / if they
will / be sufficiently touched to know and to keep the commandments of god /
and to hate and to fly centinewally all occasion of sin / and to loo a^d to
seek virtues basely / and to believe in god stabely / and to trust in his mercy
steadfastly / and so to come to perfect charity and continue therein
perseuerancly. And more the lord askith not of any man he renow in this life
And certain syns Iesu Christ dyed upon the cross wilfully to make men fre / men
of the chirche are to bold and to bossy to make men thrall / binding them under
the peyne of endelesse curse (as they say) to doo many obseruances and
ordinau^cis / which another the living nor teaching of Christ nor of his
apostles approves.

And a clerk said than to me. Thou show plainly here thy disceite which thou
haste learnyd of the^ that travel to sow popill amo^g wheat. But I cou^sell the
to go away clean from this learning / and submit the lowly to my lord / and
thou shalt find him yet to be gracious tothe.

And as fast than a another clerk said to me How wast thou so bold at Pales
cross in lo^do^ to sto^de there harde with thy tippet bou^den about thine head
a^d to repreue in his sermon the worthy clerk Alkerton drawing away all yt thou
might / ye and ye same day at after none thou meting yt worthy doctor in
Wattling street called him salfe flatterer and ypocrite

And I said. Sir I thynk certainly that there was no man nor woman that hated
verily sin and loouyd virtues / hearing the sermon of the clerk of Oxford / and
also Alkertons sermon / but they said or might iustely say / yt Alkerton
reproouyd the clerk vntrewly / and sclaundered him wrongfully and uncharitably.
For no dout if the living and teaching of Christ chefely and of his apostl^es
be true / no body that loouyth god a^d his law will blame any sente^ce that the
clerk than preached there / syns by authority of goddis word a^d by approved
seyntis and doctors and by open reason this clerk approved all things clearly
that he preached there.

And a clerk of the Archebishops said to me. His sermon was false and yt he
shewith openly syns he dare not sta^de forth and defend his preaching that
heathen preached there.

And I said. Sir I think that he purposith to sta^de stedfastely thereby / or
else he sclau^dereth foully him self and also many other that have great trust
/ that he will stand by the trewith of the gospel. For I wot well his sermon is
written both in latyne and in English / and many men have it / and they set
great pryse thereby. And sir if ye were present with the Archbishop at lambeth
when this clerk appeared and was at his answer before y^ Archbishop ye wot well
that this clerk denied not there his sermon / but two days he maynteinyd it
before the Archbishop and his clerkis.

And than the Archbishop or one of his clerkis said / I wot not which of the^.
That harlot shall be met with for that sermon. For no man but he and thou and
soche other false harlotis praisith any soche preaching.

And than the Archbishop said. Your cursed sec^e is bossy / and it ioiethe
right greatly to contrary and to destroy ye privilege and freedom of holy
chirche. And I said. Sir I know no men that travel so basely as this sect doth
(which you repreue) to make rest and peace in holy chirche. For pride
covetousness and simony which distrooble most holy chirche this sect hatith and
fliethe and trauellith basely to move all other me^ in like manner unto
meekness and wilful poverty and charity / and fre ministering of ye
sacrame^tis: this sect louyth a^d vsith a^d is full bossy to move all other
folk is thus to doo. For these virtues owe all me^bres of holy chirche to their
head Christ

Than a clerk said to ye Archbishop. Sir it is far days a^d ye have far to ride
to night / therefore make an end with hi^ / for he will none make. But ye more
sir yt ye bossy you for to draw him toward you / the more contumax he is made
and the farther fro you.

And than Malueren said to me. William kneel down and pray my lord of grace /
and leave all thy fantasies and become a child of holy chirche.

And I said. Sir I have prayed the Archbishop oft and yet I pray him for the
loo of Christ that he will leave his indignation that he has against me / and
that he will suffer me after my conning and power for to doo mine office of
priesthode / as I am charged of god to doo it. For I covet nought else but to
serve my god to his pleasing in the state yt I sta^de in and have taken me to.

And the Archbishop said to me. If of good heart thou wilt submit the now here
mekely to be rolled fro this time forth by my counsel / obeiyng mekely and
wilfully to mine ordinance / thou shalt find it most profitable and best to the
for to doo thus. Therefore tarry thou me no longer / grant to doo this that I
have said to the now here shortly / or deny it utterly.

And I said to the Archbishop. Sir owe we to believe that Iesu Christ was and
is very god and very man?

And the Archbishop said. Ye.

And I said. Sir owe we to believe / that all Christ's living and his teaching
is true in every point. And he said. Ye.

And I said. Sir owe we to believe / that the living of ye apostles and the
teaching of Christ and of all the proph^etes are true which are written in the
bible for the health and salvation of gods people? And he said. Ye.

And I said. Sir owe all christen men and women after their conning and power
for to conform all their living to the teaching specially of Christ / and also
to the teaching and living of his apostles and of prophets in all things that
are pleasant to god and edificacion to his church? And he said. Ye.

And I said. Sir ought ye doctrine / ye bidding or ye counsel of any body to be
accepted or obeid unto / except this doctrine / these biddinges or this counsel
may be granted and affirmed bi christ's living and his teaching specially / or
by the living and teaching of his apostles and prophets?

And ye Archbishop said to me. Other doctrine ought not to be accepted / nor we
owe not to obey to any ma^nes bidding or counsel / except we ca^ perceive yt
this bidding or counsel acordeth with ye bidding and teaching of christ and of
his apostles and prophets.

And I said. Sir is not all the learning a^d biddinges and counsellis of holy
chirche means and healfull remedies to know and to with stoned the privy
suggestions / and the apart te^ptacions of the fend: and also ways and healfull
remedies to slay pride and all other dedely sins and the brau^ches of the^ /
and sovereign means to purchase grace / for to withstonde and overcome all the
fleschly lusts and mouynges?

And the Archbishop said. Ye.

And I said. Sir what soever thing ye or any other body bid or counsel me to do
/ accordi^gly to this forsaid learning / after my conning and power thorough ye
help of god I will mekely with all mine heart obey thereto.

And the Archbishop said to me. Submit the than now here mekely and wilfully to
the ordinance of holy church / which I shall show to the.

And I said. Sir accordingly as I have here now before you rehearsed I will now
be ready to obeye full gladly to Christ the heed off all holy church / and to
the learning and biddynges and counsels off every pleasing membre of him.

Than the archbishop striking with his hand ferselye upon a cupborde spake to
me with a great spirit sayng. By Iesu but if thou leave soche addicions
obliging the now here without any exception to mine ordinau^ce / or yt I go out
of this place I shall make the as sure as any thief that is in ye prison of
Lantern. Advise ye now what thou wilt do. And tha^ as if he had ben angered he
went fro the cupborde where he stood to a window.

And than Malueren and a another clerk came nearer me / and they spake to me
many words full pleasantly / and a another while they menaced me / and
counselled full besily to submit me or else they said. I should not escape
ponishing over measure / for they said I should be degraded / cursed and burned
/ and so than dampned But now they said thou maiste eschew all these mischeues
/ if thou wilt submit the wilfully and mekely to this worthy prelate that hath
cure of they soul. And for the pity of Christ (said they) bethink the / howe
great clerckes the bishop of Lincoln^ / Herforde / and Purney / were and yet
are / and also. B. that is a well vnderstondinge man / which also have forsaken
and revoked all the learning and opinions / that thou and soche other hold.
Wherefore syns eche of them is mekell wiser than thou art / we counsel the for
the best / that by the example off these four clerckes thou follow them /
submitting the as they did.

And one of the bishops clerks said tha^ there / that he herd Nicoll Herforde
say / that syns he forsook and revoked all the learning and Lolardes opinio^s /
he has had mekell greater favour and more delight to hold against them / tha^
ever he had to hold with them while he held with them.

And therefore Maluere^ said to me. I vnderstonde and thou wilt take yt to a
priest / and shrine the clean / forsake all soch opinions / and take thy
penance of my lord here / for the holding and teaching of the^ / with in short
time thou shalt be greatly conforted in this doing.

And I said to the clerckes that thus besyly counselled me to follow these
forsaide men. Sirs if these men of whom ye counsel me to take example / had
forsaken benefices of temporal profit / and of worldly worship / so that they
had absented them and eschewed from all occasions off covetousness and of
fleschely lusts / and had taken them to simple living / and wilful poverty /
they had herein given good example to me and to many other to have followed
them. But now syne all these four men have slaunderously and shamefully done
the contrary / consenting to receive and to have and to hold temporal benefices
/ living now more worldly and more fleschely than they did before conforming
them to the manners off this world: I forsake them herein / and in all their
forsaid slanderous doing. For I purpose with the help of god in re remission of
all my sins and of my foul cursed living to hate and to fly privily and apertly
to follow these me^ / teaching and counselling whom soever that I may for to
fly and eschew the way that they have chosen to go in / which will led them to
the worst end / if in convenient time they repent them not / verily forsaking
and revoking openly the slander that they have put a^d every day yet put to
Christ's church. For certain so open blasphemy and slander as they have spoken
and done in their revoking a^d forsaking of the truth ought not / nor may not
privily be amended dewly. Wherefore sirs I pray you that ye be sye you not for
to move me to follow these men in revoking and forsaking of the truth and
sothefasienesse as they have done and yet doo / wherein by open evidence they
steire god to great wroth / and not only against them self but also a geynste
all them that favour them or consent to them herein / or that comeneth with
them / except it be for their amendment. For where as these men first were
pursued of enemies / now they have obliged them by other for to slander and
pursue Christ in his members Wherefore as I trust stedfastely in the goodness
of god / the worldly covetousness / and the lusty living / and the sliding fro
the treuth of these runagates shall be to me and to many other men and women an
example and an evidence to stondethe more stiffly by the trewith of Christ

For certain / right many men and women doo mark and abhor the foulness and
cowardnesse of these forsaide vntrewe men / howe that they are overcome and
stopped with benefices and withdrawn fro the trewith off gods word / forsaking
utterly to suffer therefore bodily persecution. For by this unfaithful doing
and apostosie of them specially that are great lettered men / and have
knowleged openly the treuth and now other for pleasure or displeasure of
tyrants have take^ hyer and temporal wages to forsake the truth and to hold
against it / slandering a^d perceiving them that covet to follow Christ in the
way of rightuousnesse / many men and women therefore are now moved. But many mo
thorough ye grace of god shall be moved hereby for to learn ye treuth of god /
and to doo thereafter and to stoned boldly thereby.

Than the Archbishop said to his clerks. Bossy you no longer about him / for he
and other soche as he is are confedered so to gender that they will not swear
to be obedient / and to submit them to prelates of holy chirche. For now syns I
stood here / his fellow sent men word that he will not swear / and that he
counselled him that he should not swear to me. And losel in that thing that in
the is / thou haste besyed the to loose this young man / but blessed be god /
thou shalt not have thy purpose of him. For he hath forsaken all thy learning /
submitting him to be buxum and obedient to the ordinance of holy church / and
wepeth full bitterly / and curses the full heartily for the venomous teaching
which thou haste showed to him / counselling him to doo thereafter. And for thy
false counselling of many other and him thou haste great cause to be right
sorry. For long time thou haste besyed the to pervert whom soever thou might
Therefore as many deaths thou art worthy of as thou hast given euell
councelles. And therefore by Iesu thou shalt go thither / where Nicoll Harforde
and tom Purvey were herbered And I undertake / or this day eight days thou
shalt be right glad for to doo wha^ thing that ever I bid the doo. And losel I
shall assay if I can make yt there as sorrowful (as it was told me) thou waste
glad of my last going out of Englond. By saint Thomas I shall turn thy joy into
sorrow.

And I said. Sir / there can no body preue laufully that I joyed ever of the
manner of your going out of this land. But sir to say the sothe I was joyful
when ye were gone / for the bishop of London in whose prison ye left me / found
in me no cause for to hold me longer in his prison / but at the request of my
friends he delivered me to them asking of me no manner of submitting.

Than the archbishop said to me. Wherefore that I yede out of Englond is
unknown to the: But be this thing well known to the / that god (as I wot well)
hath called me again and brought me into this land for to destroyethe and the
false sect that thou art off / as by god I shall pursue you so naroulye / that
I shall not leave a steppe off you in this land.

And I said to the archbishop. Sir the holy prophet Ieremy said to the false
prophet Anany. When the word that is the prophecy of a prophet is known or
fulfilled / than it shall be known that the Lord sent the prophet in truth

And the Archbishop as if he had no^ ben pleased with my saiynge turned him
away ward hither and thither / and said. By god I shall set upon thy shynnes a
pair of pearls that thou shalt be glad to change thy voice.

These and many mo wo^derous and co^vicious words were spoken to me manassing
me and all other of the same sect for to be punished and destroyed unto the
uttermost.

And the Archbishop called than to him a clerk / and rowned with him / and that
clerk we^t forth and soon he brought in the Constable of Saltwode castle / and
ye archbishop rowned a good while with him / and than the Constable went forth
/ and than cam in diverse seculers / and they scorned me no every side / a^d
manassed me greatly. And some counselled the Archbishop to burn me by and by /
and some other counselled him to drounde me in the see / for it is nerehande
there.

And a clerk standing be side me there kneeled down to the Archbishop praying
him that he would deliver me to him for to say matins with him / and he would
undertake that within three days I should not resist any thing that were
commanded me to doo of my prelate.

And the archbishop said / that he wold ordain for me himself.

And than after came in again ye Constable and spake privily to ye archbishop.

And than the Archbishop commanded the constable to led me forth thens with him
and so he did. And when we were gone forth thens / we were sent af^r again. And
when I came in again before the Archbishop / a clerk bad me kneel down and ask
grace / and submit me lowly / and I should find it for the best.

And I said than to the Archbishop. Sir as I have said to you diverse times to
day / I will wilfully and lowly obey and submit me to be ordenid ever after my
conning and power to god and to his law / and to every member of holy chirche /
as far forth as I can perceive that these me^bres accord with their head Christ
and will teach me / roll me / or chastise me by authority specially of goddis
law.

And the Archbishop said. I wit well he would not without soche addicions
submit him

And than I was rebukyd / scornyd and manasyd on every side / and yet after
this diverse persons cried upon me to kneel down a^d submit me / but I stood
still and spake no word. And than there was spokyn of me a^d to me many great
words / and I stood a^d herd them manase / curse and scorn me: but I said
nothing

Than a while after the Archedisshop said to me. Wilt thou not submit the to
the ordinance of holy chirche?

And I said. Sir I will full gladly submit me / as I have shewid you before.

And than the Archbishop bad the Constable to have me forth thens in haste.

And so than I was led forth / and brought in to a foul dishonest prison /
where I came never before. But tha^ked be god / when all me^ were gone for^he
than fro me / and had sparred fast the prison door after them: by and by after
I therein by myself besied me to think on god / and to thank him of his
goodness. And I was than greatly co^forted in all my wits / not only for that I
was than delivered for a time fro the sight / fro the hearing / fro the
presence / fro the scorning and fro the menacing of mine enemies: but much more
I rejoiced in the lord because that thorough his grace he kept me so both among
the flattering specially and among the menacing of mine adversaries / yt
without heaviness a^d anguish of my co^science I passed away fro them For as a
tree laid upon a another tree over whar^e or on cross wise / so was the
Archbishop and his three clerkis always contrary to me / and I to them.

Now good god for thine holy name / and to the praising of thy most blessed
name / make vs one to gender / if it be thy will by authority of thy word /
that is true perfect charity / and else not. And that is may thus be / all that
this writing read or hear pray heartily to ye lord god that he for his great
goodness that can not be with tongue expressed / grant to vs and to all other /
that in the same wise / and for the same cause specially or for any other cause
be at distance / to be knette and made one in true feith / in steadfast hope /
and in perfect charity. Amen.

Thus ends the examynacion of Master William Thorpe. And here after followed
his testament.
Matthew an apostle of Christ and is gospeler witnessith truly in the holy
gospel the most holy living and the most wholesome teaching of christ. He
rehersith how that Christ likens them that hear his words and keep them / to a
wise man that bildeth his house upon a stone / that is a stable a^d a sad
ground. This house is mannis soul in whom Christ deliteth to dwell / if it be
grounded that is stablisshed faithfully in his living and in his true teaching
/ adorned or made fair with diverse virtues / which Christ used a^d taucht
without any medlyng of any error / as are chefely the conditions of charity.
This forsaid stone is Christ upon which every faithful soul must be bylded /
syns upon none other ground than upon Christ's living and his teaching no body
may make any byldyng or housyng / where in Christ will come and dwell This
sentence witnesses saint Paul to the corinthians showing to them that no body
may set any other grou^de than is set / yt is Christ's living and his teaching.
And because yt all men and women should give all their besynesse here in this
life to bylde them virtuously upon this sure foundation: saint Paul knouleging
the fervent desire and the good will of the people of Ephesy wrote to them
co^fortably sayng: Now ye are not straungeris / gestis / nor yet comelingis but
ye are the citezyns and of the household of god / byldyd aboue upon the
foundament of the apostles and prophetis. In which foundame^t every byldyng
that is byldyd or made thorough the grace of god / it increases or grows into
an holy temple* that is / every body / that is grou^ded or bylded faithfully in
the teaching and living of Christ is there thorough made the holy temple of
god. This is the stable ground and steadfast stone Christ / which is the sure
corner stone fast joining and holding mightily to gender two wallis. For
thorough Christ Iesu mean or middill person of the trinity / the father of
heaven is pituous or mercifully ioynyd and made one to gender to mankind. And
thorough dread to offend god / a^d fervent loo to please him / men be
vnseparably made one to god and defended surely under his proteccion. Also this
forsaid stone Christ was figured by the square stones of which the te^ple of
god was made. For as a square stone / where so ever it is caste or laid / it
abides and lies stabely: so Christ and every faithful me^bre of his chirche by
example of him abides and dwells stabely in true faith / and in all other
heavenly virtues in all aduersites that they suffer in this valley of tears.
For lo / when these forsaid square stones were hewn and wrought for to be laid
in the wallis or pillars of goddis te^ple none noise or stroke of the work men
was harde. Certain this silence in working of this stone figureth Christ
chefely and his faithful me^bres / which by example of him have ben and yet are
/ and ever to the worlds end shall be so meke and paci^t in every adversity
that no sound nor yet any grudging shall any time be perceived in them
Nevertheless this chief and most worshipful corner stone which only is ground
of all virtues proud beggars repreuyd: but this despite and reprefe Christ
suffered most mekely in his own person for to give exa^ple of all mekenesse and
patience to all his faithful folowers. Certain this world is now so full of
proud beggars which are namyd priestis: but the very office of working of
priesthode / which Christ approuyth true a^d acceptith / is far fro the
multitude of priestis that now reign in this world. For fro the highest priest
to the lowest / all (as who say) study / that is they imagine and travel basely
/ how they may please this world a^d their flessch. This sentence a^d many soch
other depends upon them if it be well considered / other god the father of
heaven hath deceiuyd all mankind by the living specially and teaching of Iesu
Christ / and by the living and teaching of his apostles and prophetis: or else
all the poppies yt have ben / syns I had any knowledge or discretion / with all
the college of Cardinals Archebishopis and bisshopis / Monkeys chanons and
friars with all the contagious flock of the comunaltie of priesthode which have
all my life time a^d mekell longer reigned and yet reign a^d increase dampnably
fro sin into sin / have been a^d yet be proud / obstinate heretikes / covetous
symoners and defoulyd aduulterers in ye ministri^g of the sacramentis / and
specially in ministering of the sacrament of the altar. For as their workys
show whereto Christ bids vs take heed / the highest priestis and prelates of
this priesthode challenge and occupy vnlefully temporal lordeshippes. And for
temporal favour and mede they sell and give benefices to unworthy a^d unable
persons / yethes symoners sell sin suffering men and wome^ in every degre a^d
estate to lye and co^tinew fro year to year in diverse vices sclau^derously.
And thus by evil exa^ple of hye priestis in the chirche / lower priestis under
them or not only suffered / but they are maintained to sell full dere to ye
people for te^porall mede all ye sacrame^tis. And thus all this forsaid
priesthode is blown so hye a^d borne up in pride and vayn glory of their estate
and dignity / and so blindid with worldly covetousness yt they disdain to
follow Christ in very mekenesse a^d wilful poverty living holily / a^d
preaching goddis word treuly frely and co^tineually / taking their lyuelode at
the fre will of ye people of their pure almose / where and when they suffice
not for their true and bossy preaching to get their sustenau^ce with their
ha^dis. To this true sente^ce grounded on Christ's own living and teaching of
his apostles / these for said worldly and fleschly priestis will not consent
effectually. But as their werkys a^d also their words show / boldly and
vnshamefastly these for said named priestis and prelates covett / and enforce
the^ mightily and basely y^ all holy scripture were expou^did and drawn
accordingly to their manners a^d to their vngrou^did usages and fyndyngis. For
they will not (syns they hold it but folly and madness) comforme their manners
to the pure and simple living of Christ and his apostles / nor they will not
follow frely their learning. Wherefore all the emperors and kings / a^d all
other lords and ladies / and all the common people in every degre and state /
which have before time known or might have known / a^d also all they that now
yet know or might know this forsaid witness of priesthode / and would not nor
yet will enforce them after their conning and power to withstonde charitably
the forsaid enemies and traitors of Christ a^d of his chirche all these strive
with Antechriste against Iesu And they shall bear the indignacio^ of god
almighty withouten end / if in convenient time they amend them not / and repent
them verily doing therefore dew moornyng a^d sorrow af^er their conning and
power. For thorough presumptuousness and necligence of priestis and prelates
(not of the chirche of Christ / but occupiyng their prelacy vndewly in the
chirche and also by flattering and false covetousness of other diverse namyd
priestis) lousengers and lounderers are wrongful made and named heremites / and
have leave to defraud poor and noddy creatures of their lyuelode / a^d to live
by their false winning and begging in slouthe and in other diverse vices. And
also of these prelates these cokir noses are suffered to live in pride and
hypocrisy / and to defoull themself both bodily and gostely. Also by the
suffering a^d counsel of these forsaid prelates and of other priestis / are
made vain both brotherhodis and susterhodis full of pride and envy / which are
full contrary to the brotherhode of Christ / syns they are cause of mekill
dissension / and they multiply and sustain it uncharitably: for in lusty eating
and drinking immeasurably and out of time they exercise themself. Also this
vain confederacy of brotherhodis / is permitted to be of one clothing a^d to
hold to gender. And in all these ungrounded and vnlefull doings / priestis are
parteners and and great meddelers and counsellors And over this viciousness /
heremitis and pardoners / anchors and strange beggars are licensed and admitted
of prelates and priestis for to beguile the people with flateringis and
leasingis sclaunderously against all good reason and true believe / and so to
increase diverse vices in themself and also among all them that accept them or
co^sente to them. And thus the viciousness of these forsaid named priestis and
prelates have ben long time / and yet is / and shall be cause of wars both
withi^ ye realm and without And in the same wise these unable priests have been
/ and yet are / and shall be chief cause of pestilence of men / and moron of
beestes / and of bareness of the earth / and of all other mischiefs / to the
time ye lords and commons able them thorough grace for to know and to keep the
commandments of god / enforcing them than faithfully and charitably by one
assent for to redress and make one this forsaid priesthode to the wilful / pore
/ meke / and innocent living and teaching specially of Christ and his apostles.
Therefore all they that know or might know the viciousness that reigns now
cursedly in these priests and in their learning / if they suffice not to
vndstond this contagious viciousness: let them pray to the lord heartily for
the health of his chirche / abstaining the^ prudently fro these endured enemies
of Christ and of his people / and from all their sacraments / syns to the^ all
that know them or may know they are but fleschly dead and false: as saint
Cipriane witnesses in the first question of decrees / and in the first cause.
Ca. Si quis inquit. For as this saint and great doctors witness there / that
not only vicious priests. but also all they that favour the^ or consent to them
in their viciousness shall to gender perisshe with them if they amend them not
dewly: as all they perished that co^sented to Satan and Abijron. For no thing
were more co^fusyon to these forsaide vicious priests / than to eschew them
prudently in all their vnlefull sacraments / while they continue in their
sinful living slaunderously / as they have lunge time done and yet do. And no
dody need to be afraid (though death did follow by one wise or other) for to
dye out of this world without taking of any sacrame^t of these forsaid christ's
enemies / syns christ will not fail for to ministry him self all lefull and
healfull sacraments and necessary at all time / a^d specially at the end / to
all them that are in true feith / in steadfast hope / and in perfect charity.
But yet some mad fools say for to eschew slander / they will be shriue^ ones in
the year and comuned of their proper priests / though they know them defouled
with slanderous vices. No dout but all they that thus do or consent privily or
apertly to soch doing are culpable of great sin / syns saint Paul witnesses
that not only they that do evil are worthy of death and dampnacion: but also
they that co^sente to evil doars. Also (as their slanderous works witness)
these forsaid vicious priests despise and caste from them heavenly conning that
is given of the holy goste. Wherefore the lord throws all soche despisers from
him that they use nor do any priesthode to him. No dout than all they that
wittingly or wilfully take or consent yt any other body should take / any
sacrament of any soche named priest / synneth ope^ly and da^pnably against all
the trinity and are unable to any sacrament of health. And that this foresaid
sentence is all to gender true / into remission of all my sinful living
trusting steadfastly in the mercy of god I offer to him my soul. And to prove
also this forsaid sentence true with the help of god I purpose fully for to
suffer mekely and gladly my most wretched body to be tormented / where god will
/ and of whom he will / how he will / and when he will / and as lunge as he
will / and what temporal peyne he will and death / to the praising of his name
and to the edificacion of his church. And I that am most unworthy and wretched
cay^yf shall now thorough the special grace of god make to him plesaunte
sacrifice with my most sinful and unworthy body. I beseech heartily all folk
that rede or hear this end of my purposed testament / that thorough the grace
of god they dispose verily and virtuously all their wits / and able in like
manner all their members for to vnderstonde truly and to keep faithfully
charitably and continually all the commandments of god / and so than to pray
devoutly to all the blessed trinyte / that I may have grace with wisdom and
prudence from aboue / to end my life here in this forsaid truethe a^d for this
cause / in true feith and steadfast hope a^d in perfect charity. AMEN.

HEre ends sir William Thorpis testament on the friday after the rode day and
the twenty day of September / In the year of our lord a thousand four hundred
a^d sixty. And on the sunday next after the feste of saint Peter that we call
Lammesse day in the year of our lord a thousand / four hundrth and seven / the
said sir William was accused of these points before written in this book before
Thomas of Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury as it is said before. And so was it
than betwixt the day of his accusing and the day that this was written three
and fifty year and as mekill more as fro the Lammesse to the wodemesse. Behold
the end.
The strength of every tale is in the end.
Here folowethe the Examinacion of the Lord Cobham.
The believe of the Lord Cobh^am.
BE it known to all men that in ye year of our Lord a thousand four hundred and
thirtene / in ye first year of the reign of king Henry the fifte. The king gave
to the bishop of Canterbury leave to correct the lord Cabham. And because no
man dared somone him personally / the archbishop set up a citacion on his
cathedral chirche door on the wennisday next before the nativity of our lady in
the forsaid year / and that citacion was taken down by the friends of the lord
Cobham: and after that the bishop set up a another on our lady day which also
was rent down / and because he came not to answer on the day assigned in the
citacion the bishop cursed him for contumacy. And the lord Cobham saying all
this malice purposed against hi^ / wrote this believe that followed with his
own hand and noted it him self: and also answered to four points put against
him by the bishop / and he went to the king supposing to get of him good favour
and lordship.

The believe.
I Believe in god the father almighty / maker of heaven and of earth / and in
Iesu Christ his only son our lord / which was conceived of the holy goste /
borne of the virgin Marie / and suffered death under Ponce Pilot / crucified /
dede and buried. He went down to hells: the third day he rose again fro death:
he ascended up in to heavens he sits on the right hand of god the father
almighty: fro thence he is to come to judge the quick and dede. I believe in
the holy goste: all holy church: the comunyon of saints: forgiveness of sins /
uprising of flesh / and everlasting life. Amen.

And for to declare more plainly my sothfastnes in the believe of holy church.
I believe seithfully and verily that there is but one god almighty / and in
this godhede and of this godhede ben three persons: the father / the son / and
the holy goste / and these three persons be the same god almighty. Forthermore
I believe that the second person of this most blessed trinity in most
convenient time before ordened took flesh and blood of the most blessed virgin
our lady saint Marie for the redempcion and salvation of mankind that was lost
before for Adams sin. And I believe that Iesu Christ our lord which is both god
and man is head of all holy church / and that all tho that ben or shall be
saved ben members of this most holy church / which holy church is departed in
three parts / of the which one part is now in heue^ / that is to fey / ye
saints that in this life lived accordingly with ye most blessed law of Christ
and his lyui^g / despising and forsaking ye devil and his works / ye
prosperites of this world and the foul lust of ye flesh. The.ij. part is in
purgatory abidi^g the mercy of god / and purging the^ there of their sins / of
ye which they have be^ truly confessed in dede or else in will to have be^.
The.iij. part of this chirch is here in earth / ye which is called ye fyghti^g
chirch / for it fights every day and night against ye temptacio^ of ye devil /
ye prosperity of this false failing world / and the proud rebellio^ of the
flesh against ye soul. This chirch is departed by ye most blessed ordinau^ce of
god into three estates yt is to say / priesthode / knighthode / and como^s / to
every estate of ye which god gave charge ye one should help a another / and
none destroy other. As to priests / they should be most holy and lest worldly
a^d treuly living as ne'er as they could after the example of Christ and his
apostles. And all their besynesse should be day and night in holy example of
living and true preaching and teaching of gods law / to both the other parts.
And also they should be most meke / most serviceable / and most lovely in
spirit both to god and to ma^. In the.ij. part of this chirch yt is knyghthod
ben contained all that bear the sword by law of office / which should maintain
gods law to be preached and taucht to the people a^d principally the gospel of
Christ / and treuly to live thereafter: the which part should rather put them
self to apparel of death / than to suffer any law or constitution to be made of
ma^ / where thorough the freedom of gods law might be let to be preached and
touched to the people / or whereof any error or heresy might grow in the
church. For I suppose fully that there may come none heresy nor error among the
people / but by false laws / constitucyons / or teachynges contrary to Christ's
law / or by false lesynges. Also the second part should defendethe common
people fro tyrants oppressors and extorcioners / and maintain ye clergy doing
dewly their office / in preaching / teaching / praying / and frely ministering
the sacraments of holy chirch. And if this clergy be negligent in doing this
office / this second part of the chirche ought by their office that they have
taken of god to constrain the clergy in dew wise to do their office in the form
that god has ordened it to be done. The third part of this fighting chirch owes
to bear good will to lords and to priests / treuly to do their bodily labour in
tilling the earth / and with their true merchandise doing their doubts that
they owe both to knyghthode and to priesthode / as gods law lymeteth keeping
faithfully the co^maundme^tes of god. Moreover I believe all ye sacrame^tes of
holy chirch for to be medfull and profitable to all that shall be saved /
taking them after ye intent that god and holy chirche have ordened. And for as
mekell as I am sclaundered falsely of my believe in the sacrament of the altar
/ I do all Christen men to wit / that I believe verily that the most blessed
sacrament of the altar is very Christ's body in form of bread / ye same body yt
was borne of ye blessed virgin our lady saint Mary / done on the cross / dede /
buried / and on ye third day rose fro^ death to life / ye which body is now
glorified in heaven Also I believe that all goddis law is true / and who that
lives contrariously to this blessed law / and so contynewith to his lives end
and dies so brekyng the holy commandments of god that he shall be dampnyd into
everlasting pains. And he that will learn this most blessed law and live there
after keeping these holy commandments of god a^d ends in charity shall have
everlasting bliss. Also I vnderstonde that this folowith of believe / that our
lord Iesu Christ yt is both god and man asks nomore here in earth / but yt he
obey to him after the form of his law in true keeping of it. And if any prelate
of the chirche ask more obedie^ce than this of any man living / he exaltith
himself in that aboue Christ / and so he is an open Antichriste. Also these
points I hold as of believe in especial. And in general / I believe all that
god will that I believe / praying at the reverence of almighty god to you my
liege lord / that this believe might ben examined by the wisest and trow
clerkis of your realm / and if it he truth / that it might be confermyd / and I
to be holden for a true christen man: and if it be false that it might be
dampned / and I touched a better believe by goddis law / and I will gladly obey
thereto.

This forsaid believe the lord Cobham wrote and took it with him and offered it
to the king for to see / and the king would not receive it / but bad him take
it to them that should be his judges. And than the lord of Cobham offered to
bring before the king to purge him of all error a^d heresy that they would put
against him an hu^dred knights and squteres. And also he offered to fight with
any ma^ christen or heathen yt wold say yt he were false in his believe /
except the king and his brethren. And after he said / he wold submit him to all
manner correccio^ that any ma^ wold correct him after goddis law. And not
withstanding all this the king suffered him to be summoned personally in his
own cha^ber. And the lord of Cobham said to the king / that he had appeled to
the pope fro the Archbishop / wherefore he said he ought not to take him for
his judge / and so he had there his appel ready written / and shewid it to the
king: and therewith / ye king was more angry and said. He should not pursue his
apele / but rather he should be i^ ward till his appel were admitted: a^d than
would he or not / he should be his judge. And thus nothing of all this might be
allowed / but because he would not swear to submit him to the chirche and take
what penau^ce the Archbishop wold enjoin him / he was arrested and sent to the
tower of London to keep his day that the bishop assigned him in the kings
chamber. And than he made the believe before said with the answers to four
points that now follow to be written in two parts of an indenture. And when he
came to answer he gave that one part to the bishop / a^d that other part he
kept to himself.

The indenture of the lord Cobham
I Iohn^ Old castle knight and lord of Cobham will yt all christe^ men were /
how yt Thomas of Arundell Archbishop of Ca^terbury hath now laid maliciously
and vntreuly by his letter and his seal written of me in sclaunderous wise yt I
should otherwise feale and teach of ye sacrame^tis of holy chirche / assyning
in special ye sacrament of ye altar / the sacrame^t of penau^ce / and also in
worshipping of images / and in going on pilgrimages: otherwise than fealeth and
teaches the universal holy chirche. I take almighty god to witness yt it hath
ben and now is / and ever with the help of god shall be mine ente^t and my will
to believe faithfully a^d treuly in all the sacrame^tis yt ever god ordened to
be done in holy chirche. And more over for to declare me in these points a
foresaid. I believe that ye most worshipful sacrame^t of ye altar is very
Christ's body in form of bread / ye same body yt was borne of the blessed
virgin our lady saint Marie done on ye cross / dede and buried / a^d the third
day rose fro death to life / ye which body is now glorified in heue^ Also as
for ye sacrame^t of penau^ce I believe yt it is needful to every ma^ yt shall
be said to forsake sin / and to doo dew penau^ce for sin before done / with
true co^fessio^ / very co^tricio^ / and dew satisfaccio^ / as goddis law
limeteth and teaches / and else may he not be said / which penance I desire all
men to doo And as for images I vnderstonde that they be not of belefe but they
were ordened (syns believe was geuyn of Christ) by sufferance of the chirche
for to be kalenderis to lay men to represent and bring to mind the passion of
our lord Iesu Christ / and martyrdom / and good living of other saints. And
that who so it be that doth the worship to deed images that is dew to god / or
puttith hope feith or trust in help of them / as he should doo to god or has
affeccio^ in one more than in a another / he doth in that ye great sin of
ydolatrie. Also I suppose this fully / that every man in this earth is a
pilgrim toward bless or toward peyne. And that he that knowith not nor will not
know nor keep ye holy commandments of god in his living here / all be it / that
he go on pilgrimage into all the world / and he dye so / he shall be dampned
And he that knows the holy commaundeme^tis of god and kepith them to his end he
shall be said / though he never in his life go on pilgrimage as men use now to
Canterbury or to Rome or to any other place.

This believe indented containing the forsaid believe with these forsaid
answers he took to ye bishops when he cam to answer on the saturday next before
Michelmesse in the year aforesaid. And what so ever the bishops asked him he
bad them look what his bill said thereto / and thereby would he stand to the
death: other / answer gave he not that day / but the bishops were not quietyd
herewith. And the Archbishop bad him take auysement till moneday next following
to answer to this point / If there remained material breed in the sacrame^t of
of the altar after the words of consecracion. And in the mean time he perceiuyd
that the uttermost malice was purposed against hi^ how so ever he answered:
therefore he putt his life in goddis hand and answered thus as folowith

This is the judgment and sentence geuyn upon sir Iohn Old castle knight and
lord of Cobham the moneday next before michelmesse day at the friars preachers
in London in the year of our lord a thousand four hundred and thirtene? the
Archbishop of Canterbery / the bishop of London / the bishop of winchester /
and the bishop of Bangar / Master Iohn^ witna^ / Master Iohn^ whytehede doctors
of divinity Master Philip Morgan / Master henry ware Master Iohn^ kemp doctors
of law. And sir Robert wambnell vicar of saint Laurence in the iewrie / Master
Iohn^ Steuenes / Master Iames Colenotaries / with the four orders of friars /
and many other clerkis doming and co^uicting him for an heretike and a cursed
man. The Archbishop made all these clerkys and doctors both religious and
seculers to swear upon a book that they should not for love or favour of the
one party / nor for any envy or hatred of the other party / say nor witness but
ye truth. And the two forsaid notaries were swore^ also to write and to witness
ye words and process y^ were to be said on both the parties / and to say ye
sothe / if hit otherwise were.

After this the lord of Cobha^ came / a^d was brought before them all to his
examinacion and to his answer.

Than the Archbishop said to him. Lord of Cobham ye ben advised well enough of
the words and process that were said to you upon saturday last paste in the
chapter house of Pales / the which process were now to long to rehearse. Than I
proffered to have assoiled you (for ye were acursed) of your contumacy and
disobedie^ce to holy chirche.

Than said the lord Cobham forth with. God saith. Maledica^ benedictionibus
vestris that is to say / I shall curse your blessings

Than said the Archbishop. Sir than I peroffered to have assoiled you if ye
wold have asked it / and yet I doo the same.

Than said the lord of Cobham. Nay forso the / I trespassed never against you /
and therefore will I not doo it. And with that he kneeled down on the pavement
/ and held up his handis and said. I shrive me to god and to you all sirs / yt
in my youth I have synnyd greatly and grievously in lechery and in pride and
hurt many men and done many other horrible sins / good lord I cry the mercy.
And therewith wepingly he stood up again and said. Here / for the brekyng of
goddis law and his commandments ye cursed me not / But for your own laws and
tradicio^s aboue goddis law / a^d therefore it shall be destroyed.

Than the Archbishop examined ye lord of his believe. And ye lord of Cobha^
said. I believe fully in all goddis law / and I believe yt it is all true / and
I believe all that god will that I believe.

Than the Archbishop examined him of the sacrament of the altar / how he
beleuyd therein.

The lord of Cobha^ said. Christ upon shere thursday at night sitting with his
disciples at ye supper / after yt he had supped he took bread / and giving
thankis to the fader he blessed it and brake it / and gave it to his disciples
saying / take and eat ye of this all / this is my body yt shall be betrayed for
you / doo you this in the remembrance of me. This believe I said he.

Than the Archbishop asked him / if it were bread after the consecracion and
the sacrame^tall words said.

The lord of Cobham said. I believe that the sacrament of the altar is very
Christ's body in form of bread / the same body ye was borne of the virgin Mary
/ done on the cross / dede and buried / and the third day rose fro death to
life which body is now glorified in heaven.

Tha^ said one of ye doctors of law After ye sacrame^tall words said / there
remains no breed but the body of Christ.

Than the lord of Cobham said to one Master Iohn^ whitehede. You said to me in
the castle of Cowling / that the ooste sacred was not Christ's body But I said
/ yt was Christ's body / though seculers and friars hold eche one against other
in this opinion.

Than said they. We say all that it is goddis body. And they asked him whether
it were material bread after the consecracion.

Than said the lord I believe that it is Christ's body in form of bread Sir
believe ye not thus?

And the Archcbisshop said. Ye.

Than the doctors asked him whether it were only Christ's body after the
consecracion and no bread.

And he said to them. Yt is Christ's body and bread: for right as Christ was
here in ma^hode / and the godhede hid in the manhood / so I believe verily /
that Christ's flesh and his blot is hid there in the form of bread.

Than they smiled eche one on other doming him takyn in heresy / and said / it
is an heresy.

The Archbishop asked him / what bread it was / and the clerkis also whether it
were material or not.

Than the lord said / the gospel speaks not of this term material / a^d
therefore I will not / but I say / it is Christ's body and bread. For ye gospel
saith. Ego sum panis viuus queen de celo descend / th^at is to say. I am quick
bread / that came down from heaven. For as our lord Iesu Christ is very god and
very man / so the most blessed sacrament of the altar is Christ's body and
bread.

Than they said it is an heresy to say that it is breed after the consecracion
and the sacramental words said / but only Christ's body.

The lord said. Saint Paul the apostle was as wise as ye be^ / and he called it
bread / where he saith thus. The bread yt we break / is it not the partetaking
of ye body of the lord?

Than they said. Paule must be other wise understanded / for it is an heresy to
say that it is bread after the consecracion / but only christ's body / for it
is against the determination of the chirche. Than they asked hi^ whether he
believed not in the determination of ye church.

And he said to the^. No forsooth / but I believe all gods law and all that god
will that I believe / but not in your law nor in your determination / for ye be
no part of holy church / as openly your dedis show / but very Antichrists
contrary to gods law. For ye have made laws for your covetousness.

This they said was heresy / not for to believe in the determination of ye
chirche.

Than the Archbishop asked him / what was holy church.

He said. I believe yt holy chirch is ye number of all the^ that shall be saved
/ of whom Christ is head / of yt which chirch one part is in heue^ / an other
in purgatory and the third here in earth. This part here stands in three
degrees and estates / priestehode / knighthode / and the comunalte / as I said
plainly in my believe.

Than the arbtshop said to hi^. Wot you who is of this chirche / it is dout to
you who is thereof / ye should not judge.

The lord said. Operibus credit / iustu^ iudiciu^ iudicate / that is to say.
Believe ye the works judge ye rightful iugement. And also he said to them all.
Where find ye by gods law / that ye should sit thus upon any man or any mannis
death as ye do / but Anna and Cayphas sat and judged Christ / and so do you.

Tha^ said they. Yes sir. Christ judged Iudas

The lord of Cobham said. No. Christ judged not Iudas / but he judged himself /
and went and ha^ged himself: but Christ said. Wo to him / as he doth to many of
you. For syns ye venom was shed in to ye chirche / ye followed never Christ /
nor ye stood never in perfection of gods law.

Than the Archbishop asked him what was that venom.

The lord said. The lordshippes and possessions. For than cried an angel / wo /
wo / wo / this day is venom shed into the chirch of god / for before that time
there were many martirs of popes / and syns I ca^ tell of none: but sothe it is
/ syns yt time one hath put down a another / and one hath slain a another / a^d
one hath cursed a another as the cronicles tell / also of much more
cursednesse. Also he said. Christ was meke / and the pope is proud. Christ was
pore and forgave / ye pope is rich and a ma^slear / as it is ope^ly proved. And
thus this is ye nest of Antichriste / and out of this nest comes Antichrists
disciples / of whom these monks and friars ben the tail.

Tha^ said the prior of ye friar Austines. Sir why say ye so?

And ye lord of Cobham said / for as ye be^ pharisies divided / and divided in
habit: so ye make diuisi^on amo^ge ye people. And thus these friars and mo^kes
with soch other / be ye me^bres of ye nest of antichrist. And he said. Christ
saith. Wo be to you scribes and pharifies ypocrites / for ye close up ye
kingdom of heue^ before me^ / for sothe ye enter not your self / nor ye will
not suffer them yt wold to enter in / and thus ye be ye disciples of Antichrist
For ye will not suffer gods law to go thorough nor to be taucht and preached of
good priests / which will speak against your sins and repreue the^ / but of
soch yt be^ flatterers which sustain you in your sins and cursednes.

Tha^ said ye archbishop. By our lady sir / there shall no soche preach that
preaches dissension and division if god will.

Tha^ said ye lord of Cobham to ye archbishop Christ saith / yt there shall be
so great tribulacio^ as never was syns ye begi^ni^g. And this shall be in your
days / and by you: for ye have slain many me^ and mo shall hereafter / but
Christ s^ith except yt those days were shortened / no flesh should be saved /
but hastly god will short your days. Forthermore bishops / priests / and
dyacons ben grounded in gods law / but not these other religions / as far as I
can wet.

Tha^ a doctor of law one master Ihon kemp put to hi^ these four points that
follow. The faith and the determinacio^ of holy chirch touching ye blessed
sacrament of ye altar is this / yt after ye sacramental words ben said of a
priest in his mass / ye material bread yt was before is torn into Christ's body
/ and the material wine yt was before is torn in to Christ's very blot / and so
there remains in ye sacrament of ye altar no material bread nor material wine /
ye which were there before the sayng of ye sacrame^tall words. Sir believe ye
not this?

The lord of Cobha^ said. This is not my believe. For my believe is as I said
to you before / that ye worshipful sacrament of ye altar is very chhristes body
/ in form of bread.

Than said the archbishop. Sir Ihon / ye must say otherwise.

The lord of Cobham said. Nay / if god will but that it is christ's body in
form of bread / as all the common believe is.

The doctor said. The second is this / yt holy chirche hath determined / yt
every christe^ man living bodily upon earth owes to be shriue^ to a priest
ordened by ye chirche / if he may come to him. Sir what say ye to this?

The lord answered and said A seake man and sore wounded had need to have a
sure leche and a true / knowing his cure / and therefore a man should
principally be shreuen to god / and else his confession is noucht. And a ma^
should rather go and be counselled with a good priest that knowith goddis law
and lives thereafter than with his own priest if he were an evil man or with
any other soche.

The doctor said. The third is this. Christ ordenyd saint Peter apostle to be
his vicar i^ earth / whose see is ye chirche of Rome ordenyng and granting that
the same power that be gave to peter should succeed to all Peters successors
the which we call now the popes of Rome / by whose power in the chirche
particularly and specially ben ordenyd prelates as Archebisshopis / Bishops /
and other degrees to whom christen men owe to obeye after the law of ye chirche
of Rome. This is the determination of the chirche.

To this he answered and said. Who that followed next Peter in living is next
him in succession / but your living refuses poor peters living a^d many other
popes that were martirs in Rome that followed peter in manner of living whose
conditions ye have clean forsakyn / all the world may know it well.

The doctor said. The fourth point is this. Holy chirche has determined / that
it is medefull to a christen man to go on pilgrimages to holy places / and
there specially to worship holy relics of saints / apostles / martirs /
confessors and all saints approuyd by the chirche of Rome.

To this he said. Yt were enough to bury saints fair in the earth / but now
saints that be dead ben compelled to beg for covetousness the which in their
life hated covetousness and begging / but I say to you all / and know it for a
treuthe / that with your shrines and idols and your feigned absolucions and
indulgences and your te^poraltes / ye draw to you all the riches of this world.
Why sir said one of the clerkis / will ye not worship images?

What worship said the lord.

Tha^ said friar Palmer. Sir ye will worship the cross of Christ that he died
on.

Where is it? said the lord.

The friar said. I put case sir that it were here before you.

The lord said. This is a ready man to put to me a question of a thing / that
they wot never where it is. And yet I ask you / what worship.

A clerk said. Soche worship as Paul speaks of / that is this. God forbid me to
joy but in the cross of our lord Iesu Christ.

Than said the lord / and spread his arms abroad. This is a very cross.

Than said the bishop of London. Sir ye wot well that he died on a material
cross.

Than said the lord. Our salvation cam in only by him that died on the cross
and by the material cross. And well I wot yt this was the cross that Paul joyed
on / that is / in the passion of our lord Iesu Christ.

The Archbishop said. Sir Iohn^ ye must submit you to the ordinance of the
chirche.

The lord said. I wot not where.

Than the Archbishop red a bill of his iugement and convicted him for an
heretike.

After the reding of the bill / the lord said. Though ye judge my body / I hope
to god that he will save my soul and he said that he wold stand to the death by
these things before said. With the help of Iesu. And than he said to all the
people. Sirs for goddis love be well ware of these men / for they will beguile
you else / and led you blyndelinges in to hell and themself also. For Christ
saith if one blind man led a another / both fall in to the ditch And after this
/ thus he prayed for his enemies and said Lord god I beseech the forgive my
persewe^s / if it be thy will. And than he was led a gain to ye tower of London
/ and thus was the end.

WHile the lord of Cobham was in the tower he sent out privily to his friends /
and they at his desire enfourmyd and writ this bill that folowith next /
commending it to ye people / that they should cease ye sclau^ders and leasynges
/ yt his enemies made on him.

FOr as mekill as sir Iohn^ Old castle knight and lord of Cobham is vntreuly
convicted and prisoned / and falsely reported and sclaundered among the people
by his adversaries / yt he should other wise feale and speak of the sacramentis
of holy chirche / a^d specially of the blessed sacrament of the altar / than
was written in his believe which was indented and takyn to the clergy a^d set
up in diverse opine placis in the cite of London Known be it to all the world
that he never varied in any point there fro but this is plainly his believe
that all the sacraments of holy chirche ben profitable and medefull to all the^
that shall be said taking them after the intent that god and holy chirche hath
ordenyd. Farther more he beleuith that the blessed sacrament of the altar is
verily and treuly Christ's body in form of bread Trewth long hyd now is
disclosed / Praised be god. Amen.


