A STAY AGAINST STRAYING, OR A Reply to a Treatise published in the defence of
hearing Antichristian Ministers.
SECTION I.
An answer to the nameless Epistoler.
HOwsoever the publisher of the Treatise hath thought it fit to conceal his
name: it is question, vvhethe^ he were not a shamed, to put his name to it. a.
pro: 27. 14. yet he hath prefixed to it, a large preface, wherein with a Loud
voice a he blesses the author, his friend, and the work it self, and seeks by
many unchristia^ speeches, to disgrace some men what he can, inregard they
Zealously opposed his new minion Idol.

Three reasons he gives, why (after 9. years concealment,) he hath now
Published the book* first the large abilities of the author a above many
others. andc.

Answ: 1. this ground is sandy, and he speaks ( Ar^ ^) besides the matter: For
howsoever we confess, that the Author, was a godly and learned man: notwith
standing it follows not, that whatsoever he said, it was therefore true, and
necessarily to be published. Without offence that fitly may be applied to him,
which a learned writer, writes of Chrisostome, Cal^ehil Treatise of the Cross
page. 26. he was not without his fault. his golden mouth wherein he passed
others, had otherwhile leaden words, which yielded to error and abuse of the
time.

2. Had the Pistler respected (as he should) the authors large abilities, he
would not have made that book so commo^ as he hath done, to the mans great
dishonour. When one Pammachius Ieroms ^ Epist: ad pamm: a Learned Man,
understood that Hierome, had written some things amiss, against Iovinian, he
sought to suppress all the Copies, and to have them concealed, till the faults
therein were corrected. If the Publisher Let such as had a hand this way think
of Christs vvorde^ in mat. 18. 7. vvo^ to them by whom offences come. or
others, had so don with that first copy which they found in his study, they had
don well, and manifested good affection to the author: but in that they caused
so vile a thing to be spread abroad, they did ill, and were his enemies. And
here I think of that sentence in Eccles: 10. 1. dead flies cause the oy^e^t of
the Apothecary to send forth a stinking savour: so doth a little folly, him
that is in reputation for wisdom and honour. I acknowledge to Gods glory, and
the Treatisers due Praise, that there are in print of his, sundry fruitful
treatises Specially his Justification of separation. a book so sufficiently
penned as no Adversary hitherto durst reply.: but certanelie this published
since his death, is like the wild gourd in the Pottage, a chief cause that the
former are the less accepted with the godly. It is true therefore as Ferus
ferus Annot. in Ecclesic; 10. v. 1. foal. 95. 2^ Chro: 19. 12. 1. King: ^. 46.
saith one fault deprives men of many favours. Iehosaphats near affinity with
Ahabs house, marvelously eclipsed his other virtues: so the Treat: his pleading
for Antichristian Priests, and the hearing of them, lies as a great blott upon
him. But what shall I say, there is no man that lives and sins not. Wise men
doe not things sometimes wisely. Nemo morta^ omnibus ^ sapit* plin.

3. It is a weak ground to persuade men to embrace any doctrine from the large
abilities of some persons holding it: for we are charged, not to believe what
an Angel from heavens Gal. 1. 8. should teach us, if he speak not according to
the Oracles of God. The imitators of Alexander thought it not enought, to
follow him in his virtues, but in his stouping and other gestures. But
christians have learned to doe better: to wit, In a certain sermon which he
made to* young men. to leave all men (be he king, minister, moister andc) where
they leave the truth. Basil for this purpose uses a fine similitude; we must (
saith he) be partakers of other men's sayings, after the manner of bees: they
fly not to all flowers, nor where they sit, doe the crop them quite away, but
take only so much, as suffices to their honey making: so we, (if we will be
wise) must take from others, so much as is sound, and agreeable to truth, and
for the rest not meddle with it.

His second reason is, the worth of the work. For it were (saith he) great I
ittie It seems the 9. years before he printed it he wanted pity. that such a
work as this should be concealed: And therefore he tells vs in the title page,
he hath published it for the common good. And in the conclusion of the preface,
desires the Lord, to make the whole work (for the general good now set forth)
profitable to those that love the truth.

Answ: 1. The things that are not fair, seem fair to him that is in love.
Theocrit* i^ Bucoliast. So Daphius, in the poet saith to Polephemus. It is just
so with superstitious men, they think passing well of their vain in ventions,
howbeit they have no reason for it.

And surely, were it not, but that this man is Fallen excessively in love with
the Treatise, Quid non cogit emir. martial, l. 4. Encolp he would not so
applaud it, much less have been at the charge of the printing. But what may be
reaso^, that he and others, are so in love with it? if they would answer here
[bona fide,] my mind gives me, they would say as Samson did when he desired to
take a wife of the vncircumcised Philistines: she pleases me well Judge: 14. 3.
So these covet to be unequally yoked with this harlot-hearing: because it
pleases them well. and why so? oh it leads them unto an easy and plausible
walking: they have a trick now to deceive the Prelates, and to shun Persecution
for the cross of Christ.

2. Touching a common good, this is the common pretence of all deceivers, Pro;
1, 11. 12 1. Pet. 2. 19. Eze. 12. 22. and the same as old almost as the world:
for the Devil used it, Gen. 3, 2. 30. to beguile the woman in Paradise saying
God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof ye shall be as Gods. He reasoned
here (as Porous Comment: in Gen: c. 3. v: 5. p. 115. Tom: 1. observes on the
place) to this effect that which will be for your good, Duaran: distinct: 8.
Field of the Church. l. 3. p. 157. 158. Sanders de visib: m^n: lib: 5. ought
not to be omitted: But the eating of the forbidden fruit will be so: (for ye
shall be as Gods:) Therefore, andc.

And the childre^ of this wicked one, have since in this followed their fathers
stepts: for what lies and beastly vanities are there extant, but the authors in
publishing of them, have professed an aiming at Public profitt? Was not the
Hierarchy that monstrous monster, cunningly erected at first (and to this day
justified) under colour of common good: 22. Gui^. hard l. 4. c. 6. sun. Lomb.
l. 4. Them in 1. Cor. 14. Soct. l. namely to Preserve the unity and peace of
the Church: for the avoiding of schisines and factions and that there may be no
Tyranny or oppression among brethren. The like may be said of the mass, merits,
purgatory, 2^. Qu^st. 1. art 1. Polidor l. 6. c. 12. invent: pilgrimages,
bowing at Altars, praying to Angels, worshipping of Images, Crosses, Pardons,
Holy oil, Fasts, Feasts, absolution by priests, prayer in an unknown tongue:
and the rest of the filthy trash and dung in Babilo^: Allexan ab. Allexxan: l
3. doe not the covetous merchants of that see, tel their chapman all is for
common good: [se Sotus l. 4 distinct 43. art 3. Bellarm. de purgat. l. 2. c.
17. Thomas Equine: ^ did: their Books] Not but their bells in the tower, and
the cross on the steeple, are set up under a pretence of common good: the one
being to drive away evil spirits* and the other to keep the Church from
burning, To vel vs therefore of common good, we tel him, Plus aloe^s. quam
mellis habit. Iuvenal: Sat: 6.. This is but a cunning bait, which impostors
formerly have used, to draw simple people into a snare. But to keep our selves
from it, we need go no further, then to a saying of an Ethnic: That only are we
to esteem good and profitable, which we see to be right and lawful Nihil vtile,
quote non item iustum et honestum. Cic: De Office li^: 3..

But seeing the thing he pleads for, is most unrighteous, (for it tends to the
dishonour of Gods great name, the discredit of the gospel, the keeping back of
many from receiving the love of the truth VVitne sie many in England, which
hold the parish Churcher false, and yet go thither to hear, being misled by
this Treat:) great pity it was, so corrupt a thing ever saw the light, but
rather had perished in the birth, or at least, upon the first sight of it, the
finders had burned it, as the books mentioned in Act: 19. 19. For so a great
deal of common hurt had bee^ prevented in the Churches of God, and in the world
too, Woe unto them that call evil good. Esa. 5. 20..

His third reason is, to preserve the Churches priuileidge: defend Christs
cause against the enemies of God, which aim at the utter ruinating of the
Church, and labour to rent it in pieces, andc.

Answ, The Romans [as it is reported Varre.) kept in Capitolio certain dogs and
Geese, which by their barking, and giggling should give warning in the night,
of thieves that entered in but if they cried out in the day time, when there
was no suspicion, their legs were to be broken of, because they cried when
there was no cause. If the Publishers conte^ding here, be [ Doctrinsa vane est,
rati^ ut accesserit. Tull: as he says himself] to preserve the churches
privileidge. and the thing certain which he charge his brethren with: to weet,
that they were the troblers of Israel. let him then (^ Suidas:) we are the
laurel. But if he be erroneous in the one, and a false accuser in the other, I
hope among the godly wise, he shall have his demerit accordinly. To the matter.

First that hearing of false ministers is a privileidge of Gods Church, I deny
it, this is but the froth of his own lips, neither soled nor savoury: as well
he may say, that whoredom is a women's privilege: theift a servants: rebellion
a subjects: disobedience childrens: reason and ground there is alike. And to
prove this, thus I reason.

What soever God hath bestowed upon his Church as her privilege, the same is to
be found in his word: But it is not mentioned there, that true believers (as
their privilege) ought to hear Antichristian Teachers: Ergo: andc.

The proposition is vnquestionablie certain by these scriptures. Psa: 19. 7. 2.
Timot 3. 15. 16. Esa. 8 20. Iohn. 15. 17. Act. 20. 27.

Besides this is the unanimous consent of learned writers. The scriptures (
saith Athanatius Cont, Gent. In Iohn. home. 49.) doe help vs with the knowledge
of every truth. Here (saith Augustine f.) we find whatsoever is to be don, or
not don Allthings ( saith Chrisostome Comment: in 2 These: 2.) that are meet to
be known, in Gods word are manifested. The same saith Iustine In Apol: 2. et.
inst. Stror^. l. 6., Clemens 2. Lib. 2. e. l. Paraeus Dispute. Aphoris in
Bellarm de verb. dei. Aphor. 1. Polanus, Synt. theol. lib. 1. C. 46.,
Cartwright Ansvv. to the Them on Hob. 9 sec^. 2., B, Hall Rome. irrecon. sect.
16., D. Iames Manuduct. to divinit. Page. 1.. and others. The Assumption is
proved thus: If the hearing in question be condemned in scripture: then it is
no privilege of the Church: but the first is true. therefore the second.

The first part which is only controversall is evident and clear by these
scriptures. Levit. 17. 3. 4. deu. 12. 5. Pro. 5. 8. Hos. 4. 15. Mat. 7. 15. 2.
Cor. 7. 15. 16. 17. Revel: 18. 4. Son. 1. 6. 7. To this all sorts of writers
ascent. Zanchie Explicat. in Philp. c. 3. ver. 2, page. 17 4. Tom. 4. on
philip. 3. 2. Beware of dogs: Writes thus: Tales doctors, queen testimonium non
habent ab Apostolic, Apostolicisque viris atque ecclesijs: nempe sum diligentia
ac studio curandum esse, vt eos observemus, cognoscamus, et fugiamus: Such
Teachers as have not their authortie, From the Apostles, and Apostolical men,
and true churches, we ought with great study and care to observe, know, and
avoid them. The Authors Admon. ^. page. 27. of the Admonition to the parliament
affirm: Whosoever preaches by an unlawful calling he may not be heard: no,
though he speak the truth, no more then the Devil was to be suffered, howbeit
he preached Christ. As God ( saith One T. C. repl. 1. p. 83. 155.) hath
ordained that the word should be preached, so also in what order and by whom:
And therefore as we care for the truth, so we must of whom we receive it. So
judicious Rolloc: Comment. in 1 These. 5. 21. l. P. 228.: Non audiendi et
explorandi sunt, nisi queen antegrestam ad id vocatione^ habent aliquam. They
are not to be heard and tried, who have not a lawful fore-gooing calling to the
ministry. And of the same judgment, is Rivetus, Comment. in psa. 16. page. 52,
musculus Comment. in Mat. 7. 15., Oecolampadius Comment. in Esa. c. 2. sol.
20., Calvin in Psal. 16., Fenner Interpretat. Son. chap. 1, ^. 6. 7., Lotion
Syons Plea. page. 283.: yea the papists in this point are sounder then either
the Pistler or his Leader.: Paul, The Popes first Brave, dated in the years
1606,, the fifth, in a certain Bull sent to his Calves in England (Catholikes
Imight have said) charge them by all means, not to go to the parish Churches,
or hear their sermons, least they incur the wrath of God. The Rhemists Annot in
1. Cor. 10. sest, 21 say the like: so the Doway translators. and add thus: Such
as go unto false Churches, are to be counted of that rank Paul speaks of, in
Tit. 1. Vit. who confess they know God but in works deny. him. In 1 king. chap.
5. v. 19..

For the munition therefore which he speaks of here, if this sinsull hearing be
his best, to preserve Gods Church from the attempts of adversaries. Let him
keep it himself: for we know (oh that we had never known it) by unhappy
experience, the use and nature of it. As the Jaws of old by taking the
Egyptians for their munition Esa. 30. 2. 3., where it hath entertainment, a
very fyer-brand that consumes the building: a Gangrene that stays not in one
place but corrupts by degrees the whole body, and kills It Fernel, Amb.
physiolog. l, 7. ^ p 6^.: in a word it is as the wild Bore of the forest, which
wastes the Lords vineard. Witness the Church of Leiden when by this means now
sits sol^tary, that was full of people. thy Calse O Samaria hath cast thee off.
hos. 8. 5.

The Butler talks of Athalias spirit, and compares his opposites to her, but
surely were not his eyes blinded, with the unlawful love of his dear Delilah,
he might see that the similitude holds better another way. Did not that wicked
woman occasion trobles in Israel, 2 King. 11. by seeking to put down their
right king, and set up her self (a usurper and murderer) in the place of him:
now what else ( speak on your credit) hath this idolatrous hearing don, since
the time it was hatched? but like the thing that God hates, sowed discord among
brethren, Pro. 6. 19. and why? because it tends to the putting down, of our
true king Christ Iesus, and to raise up Antichrist again, that bloody Tyrant.

2. Touching the personal wrong here offered to his opposites: as naming them
the enemies of God, church renters, schisme-makers: matching them with most
notorious sinners: and publishing to the world private things purposely to
disgrace them. I think this not worthy of answer: the men are now at rest:
besides such was their good walking when they lived, as that his uncharitable
tongue and pen, cannot weake^ their well deserved praise, among the saints that
knew them. Notwithstanding sober words would better have becommed him. Is this
religion? is this conscience? is this charity? To tell in the ears of the world
private things against brethren. Methinkes the man should blush at it:
specially being reputed (or at least would be) one of large Charity, tantane
animis calestibus ^rae, Indeed. l. 1. and a great reprouer of others for rash
censuring: Now knows he not what an odious thing it is, to condemn that thing
in another, wherein he himself in the mean time is a transgressor, this not
only lies under the just reproof of the scriptures. Mat 7. 3 4. Rome 1. 21. But
also condemned by heathens. It is note of folly (saith Tully) est enim proprium
stulriti^ aleg^ru^ vitiae corner oblivissi suorum. Tul: de offi^. l. 3. to see
another mans faults and forget our own, foe in the Poet.

But it is no new thing, for such as are earnestly zealous for the churches
reformation, that all things may be there according to the divine pattern, to
be tongue-bitten by innovators and corruptors of religion: for so were the
Prophets used, ^ King. 18. 18 Eze: 4. 15. Am 7. 10. so was Christ Luck. 23. 25.
Ieh. 19. 12. and Act 19. 12. Act. 17. 6. Act. 24. 6. his Apostles served by the
Jaws. So in ages after, Constantine S^zomen: l. 1. c. 8. was accused as a
pervertor of Gods order, because he furthered and followed christianity. Other
goodman wanted not their cross this way, but were always reviled with most
words of reproach, and deemed of their adversaries the vilest persons of the
earth. When the Scythians as Justin Just. l. 2. reports saw they could not
overcome their enemies with weapons: they laid them aside and took up whips.
Men in error doe so: finding in scriptures nothing for them, they make whips
with their tongues: that is, slander always their opposites with heresy;
schism, pride, obstinacy, disloyalty, sedition, et quid non: hoping to get that
by railing, of which they have no ^ to get by reasoning. Such a one he seems to
be* that hath set forth the New English Canaon. the profane Ismael seeks to
disgrace the truth by scoffing at it. As he loved cursing, so let it come unto
him as hedelighted not in blessing, so let it be far from him psa: 109, 17.

3. But to speak a little of the accusation it self: How soeueuer I will not
meddle with their divisio^, neither justify his opposites in the man^er of
their departure: not withstanding, al though he wipe his mouth, and would make
others, chief authors of the breach: yet the truth is, he and such which went
ordinarily unto false churches, with such as justified and abetted so vile a
practice, were principally the instruments, of that great scandal. It is a
received Tenant amongst the learned: Such are the causers of contention, that
bring new doctrines into the Churches of God.

Come. in Rome. 16. 17. 18. ot. 1 Cor. 1. p. 7. Porous describes the authors of
dissentions, to be men that adulterate pure doctrine by humane inventions,
violate the discipline of the Church, and seek by sugared words, and
counterfeit zeal to pervert others. To the same effect writes Gaulter, Comment.
in Rome: 16. 17. Mornaeus, lib: de Eceles. l. 2. Martyr, de Calib et vote:
cont. Smite. Morton, f Parker: On the Crossed pa. 2. c. 9. sect. 3 p. 116 yea
some Papists too, as Cassandra De Roar. Eceles. art, 7. and others.

To apply this, seeing the Publisher and others with him, have committed
apparent idolatry, maintained it in the Church, and sought thereby, to pervert
the right ways of the Lord, and to draw the sincere into error and sin: it must
follow necessarily, that the strife and contention which hath fallen out upon
it, either among brethren of their own congregation or else where, came chiefly
by their occasion, and means.

For the exclamation therefore, which he and others take up against the godly,
Apol. l. 2. for their contentions, I mind it truly, as a great profaneness in
them. We would count him a most vile person, that would doe whatsoever he
could, to make another angry, and when he saw him so, would reproach him for
it, blaze it abroad, speak of it behind his back, to his great disgrace. It
were happy for some if they had never abused Gods people this way, by seeking
(as it were) to anger them in hearing unlawful ministers, marrying their wives
by Popish licenses, thorough justifying halters and neuters, comunicating
spiritually with Antichristians: and other such muddy stuff found the vilely:
and afterwards perceiving them to be stirred hereat, cry out with a full mouth.
oh what a contentious people are they, oh how scandalous, better for aman to
walk alone, then with such a compaine. And this shall be published in Gath and
Askelon, that the enemies of the Lord may rejoice and triumph. A seru^ that
runs away ^ of his moister.

But good it were, that these make bates did consider of that great day, in
which Christ shall appear in the brightness of his father, to avenge the quarle
of his least commandment? when God rises Ioh 31. 14. up, wh^ ^ they answer him?
what will they say, when he shall not only cl^ge them, with idolatry and
covenant-breaking. But also to be the cause, and ground of the divisions, and
schisms in his churches: by means whereof, his name was blasphemed, the souls
of the righteous grieved, the truth slandered, the weak scandalised, and the
wicked hardened in evil.

It is sure [as some doe obserue Porous in Rome: 14. ver: 13. page. 469. ] that
a more greeuious punishment is reserved for them which cause others to offend,
then for they which doe such things themselves. Thus the serpent was punished
more then Eve, she more then Adam: so lezebel felt heavier and deeper judgment
then Ahab. To sin hath not so much perdition in it as to induce others to sin,
so Chrisostome. Peccare non tantum in se per litionis habit quantum quote
reliqia ad peccandum inducuntur. home. 25 in Epist: ad Rome. in more. ad locum.

Who is wise, that he may understand these things, and prudent that he may take
knowledge of them: ffor the ways of Jehouah are righteous, and the just shall
walk in them, but the When at the day of Judgment it so^lbe laid to their
charge that they have given scandal, they will wish rather to have been
drovvned Parre on Rome: chap. 14. v. 13. p. 173. rebels shall fall in them.

SECTION 2.
THus [Reader] thou hast seen the reasons, why the Treatise was published: Now
in the next place the Epistoler entreats thee, to take notise of two things: 1.
That this practice of hearing unlawful ministers, Is not against any article of
saith, which is by the Church professed whereof the author of this treatise was
pastor.

Answer 1. Nay stay there, that is not so, for in Article 31. of our
profession, (consented unto by moister Robinson Justification of Separate:
page: 123,) this thing is absolutely condemned. We, speaking there of
Antichristian Assemblies profess, that the faithful may not have any spiritual
co^munion in their public administrations. And for proof thereof, these
scriptures are alleged Reu: 18. 3. 4. Hos: 4. 14. 15. 1 Cor: 10 14. 17 2 cro:
6. 14. 15. Son. 1. 6. 7.. But saith he in the same place, this is no act of
communion. I answer, our Christian predecessors so understood it, and so doe
the faithful generally to this day: besides this new devise wants, as truth so
common sense: for it is, as if one should affirm, that he eats and drinks, but
partakes not in the things he uses. Hoccine credibile est, aut memorabile
Teren. And: Act. 4. so. 1: ^.

But it may be he thinks the following lines will help him. If hearing simply
were an act of communion, then every heretic, or Atheist, or whatsoever he
were, that should come into the church, should have communion, which if it were
true, it were good that every Church that will avoid Communion with profane men
to meet in private, and then shut the door, when their own company is met
together, or else I cannot see, New you may, if you shut ^ et your eyes against
the lig^ a Regula ^ est distinguere aliter omnia quae a so invicem Possum
seperari. how they can avoid communion with wicked men,

Answ. It is a certain rule (as Logicians teach) things are really to be
distinguished, which in themselves are to be separated each from other. The
ignorance of this distinction, is a maine cause (as I have observed) of some
men's erring in this point of hearing: ffor they think, (as the Pistler here
unwisely writes) that if members of true Churches have not communion with the
unbelievers which come unto their meetings: that then it will follow, that they
may be present in false Churches in time of public exercise, and yet have no
communion. Melano. l. 4. distinct. Systemat. theol. 1. c 4 P. 58.

To reply briefly: (for I purpose to speak more largely of this in an other
place) There is besides Church communion, a communion in the ordinances of the
Church: as in the state it self, ministry, worship, Government: Howsoever
therefore a man be no member actually, of such, or such a body: And so in that
respect (to speak properly) he hath no Church communion: yet being there a
worshipper, he communicates in the actions don, I say whether they are good or
evil.

The christian Corinthians were separated formally from the Heathen-state, and
constituted in a true Church-state: notwithstanding Paul saith, 1 Cor. 10. that
such among them, as went unto Idol Temples, had there communion: as how? not
Church communion, but they communicated in the evils there practised. They
communicated as Comment. 1 Cor. 10. ver. 18. page. 640. Porous layth with
idols, or as Ierome on the same place. phraseth it, the participation of
devils. To be short according to Bozos ciusdem cultus ac sacrificij sunt
conscij, sieve in eodem sacri ficio consorts, ac socij, ac ejus quasivinculo in
eadem religion cop^lati. interpretation, they were guilty of the same seruise
and sacrifice, or were companions and consorts therein, and coupled themselves
(as it were) in the same religion.

To apply this to our point in controversy, If an Heretic Atheist, or
whatsoever he be, come to our Churches, we acknowleidge he hath communion: to
weet, in the ordinances: how be it no Church communion, that is, no communion
in, or with the saints gathered into the faith and order of the Gospel: so in
gooing unto unlawful Assemblies, if a man be no member, his communion there, is
not with the people in that state, but in the humane inventions: Bozo Anno^ in
1. Cor. 10. 1, page. 137. that is the Idol Church, wil-worship, false ministry,
and other such abominations: And this common reason shows, for he that is not a
member of a Corporation, may yet communicate, in the administrations thereof,
howbeit (true it is (in, or with the body he doth it not.

We need not therefore shut our doors against any person, for there follows no
danger, by their coming unto vs: ^for howsoever [as I said] they have
communion, yet not with vs, but rather in the things practised with vs. Now
what can the Pistler hence conclude? only thus: [vnlesse he be Graculus inter
musas @] If I may doe a lawful thing, then I may doe an unlawful thing: If a
foreigner may partake in the civil justice of true magistrates, then he may so
doe, in the sinful administrations of Rebels and Traitors. I wrong him not: for
his reasoning and this [^] is all one in substance: If it be lawful to
communicate in a true Church, Omnia item pului^, Lucian. with Christs ministry
and worship; then a man may lawfully communicate in a false Church with
Antichrists ministry and worship. I could say more, but I am loath to discover
his nakedness too far. But no marvel when men leave the way of truth if foolish
and false things doe follow,

2. But admit this hearing were not against any article of our Churches? what
is the note, that the Reader must then observe: Surely unless the Epistoler
would be noted for nonsense, we must needs conceive, that he holds, as the
Papists Bellarm^de c Rome. po^: l. 4. 1. 4. Rhemist. n Luck. 18. sect* 4* doe:
to wit, that the Church cannot err: and therefore we must believe as the Church
believes. But are you in good earnest? well, we will so take it, till we are
better informed. In the mean time take you notise what the Lord saith Esa: 8:
20, To the Law and to the Testimony: Sermon,: de^em ^. if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them,

Take notise also, what Augustine Just mart. cont: tryph^ saith: we ought to
believe a Church, but not in a Church, because the Church is not God, but the
house of God. To the like purpose others: Neither Pastor, Council, B: Bilson.
par 2. p. 266 or Angel, ought in point of faith to be received, I say not
against, but without or besides the scriptures. These k are only safe. and
Hilar: in psa 86. to be credited* for human pra^pts they want weight: Lactan: l
3. c 17. they bind not. Id cont: Foist: l. 23. ego soli scripture fido said
Theodoret Z^nch. de Tripl. Epis. p* 103.. J give trust to the scripture alone.
And some papists in words say no less: as Thomas of Equine, l 9 art. vlt.
Abbas, Deal cap, significasti. pan^ ^ Gerson, In locchi P^pper. Mech^inien^.
Picus Mirandula. Quaest ^an Pa su^. con. Occam, Dial. l. ^. p. 1. c. 28. P.
Pi^s the second Abba^ Vespers^n^is:? p. 443. and Others.

In conclusion then, seeing the hearing of unlawful Ministers, is flat against
scripture articles, (as we ha^e partly manifested, and God willing, more will
doe) we ^ must ^ as Ierome* in Mat. 23 speaks) it, though it should in the mean
time be justified and practised by many Churches and people.

The second thing, which he desires may be noted is, that this hearing was not
in the judgment of the Church esteemed as a thing that might not be borne with
all.

Answ: 1: The doctrine of the Nicolaitans (which was Trenan* l. 1* 27.
Epiphanc. 1. Tom. 1. E^ 3. 29. that adultery and fornication were no sins, and
that men might communicate with the sacrifices of Idolaters, in their idol
temples) was not in the judgment of the Churches at Pergamos, and Thyatira
esteemed as a thing that might not be borne withal: was the same therefore
good? indeed such a conclusion we must either here gather from his words: or
conclude he knew not well what he wrote.

2. To the judgment of that Church, when they wrote to London: I may oppose
their former and better judgment: ffor with reverence to the Phrase, from the
beginning this was not so: ffor in their constitution, and many years after,
they held Remember therefore from vvh^nce thou art fallen, and repent, and doe
the first works. Reu. 2. 5. hearing of unlawful Ministers a very unlawful
practise.

And so much appears in sundry passages Published to the world by the Pastor
himself. And for the Readers better satisfaction, I think it not amiss to sert
down their Own words,

Those Munumission to a manuduction page. 5. who partake in the work of
Preaching of one sent by the Bp: DOE PARTAKE IN WHAT LIES IN THEM IN THE
AVTHORITY OF THE SENDER. Again The authority of Ministers in their Parishionall
Churches, c Page. 4. may not be, by Gods people partaken with, no not in
actions otherwise Lawful, under the pains of Babilons Plagues. Again in another
book Religious Communion page. 20. thus they write: Let all them that fear God,
consider, that when they come to worship in the Parish Assemblies, they join
themselves where God hath not joined them, and doe acknowledge that society for
the Church of God, and communion of saints, which he hath not sanctified for
that purpose, and in saying ourfather with them, they acknowledge them, for the
children of God, who in the perswation of their consciences are of their father
the devil. And in the same book a little after: page. 32. Their very
administrations by unlawful calling, are the sins, and so to PARTAKE WITH THEM
IN THEIR ADMINISTRATIONS, IS TO PARTAKE WITH THEM IN THEIR SINS: contrary to.
Timot. 5. 22. Reu. 14. 4. In their answer to, Moister Barnerds book, thus they
write largesie of this point. Justification of Separate: page. 78. 79. 80. ^e
also page 17. 162. 276. 433. Some of which, is as follows.

But the thing which most grieves Mr. B* and at which he hath greatest
indignation Pap. 62. is, that we will not hear his sermons though he preach
nothing but the true word of God. And so he desires to hear of vs, where the
hearing of the true word of God only preached is sin and forbidden by Christ,
or the Prophets or Apostles.

For answer hereof I would know first whether Mr. B. speaking here and in many
other places, of the true Word of God, do means that God hath a true word and a
false word, or rather bewray not an accusing conscience, that they in England
have not the true word truly taught, that is, in a true office of Ministry?

Now for the demand (referring the reader for more full satisfaction to that
which hath been published at large by others) I do answer, that as it was
unlawful to N^mb. 16. 2. C^. 26. 1 King. 12. communicate with Corah or with
vzziah though they offered true sacrifices, so IS IT UNLAWFUL* TO COMMVNICATE
WITH ADEVISED MINSTERY, WHAT TRVTH SOEVER IS TAVGHT IN IT.

Secondly the Lord hath promised no blessing to his word but in his owe
ordinance, though by his superaboundand mercy he oft times vouchsafe that which
no man can chalendg by any ordinary promise

Thirdly * no man may partake in other men's sins, ^m. 5. 12. but every
Ministry either devised or usurped is the sin of him which exercises it. Rev.
18. 4. And as no good subject would assist or communicate with any person in
the administration of civil Justice to the Kings subjects, (no not though he
administered the same never so equally and indifferently) except the same
person had commission from the King so to do: so neither ought the subjects of
the kingdom of Christ to partake with any person whomsoever in the dispensation
of any spiritual thing: (though in it self never so holy) withot sufficient
warrant and commission from the most absolute and sovereign King of his Church
Christ Iesus. And where Mr. B. speaks of hearing the true word of God only
preached, he intimates therein, that if we would hear him preach it would
satisfy him well* and so teaches vs with himself and others to make a schism in
the Church, in using one ordinance and not an other.

It is all one whether a man communicate with the minister in his pulpit or
with the Chancellor in his consistory, both of them minister by the same power
of the Bishop. The Chancellor may judge justly, and who knows whither or no the
Minister will teach truly? And if he doe not, but speak the vision of his own
heart, what remedy hath the Church, or what can they that hear him do? May they
rebuke him openly according to his sin, and so bring him to repentance? or must
they not bear his errors yea his heresies also during the pleasure of the
Bishops, even their Lord, and his?

And would you Mr. B. be content your people should hear a masse-Priest or
Jesuite, though he professed as loud as you do, that he would teach the true
word of God? And think not scorn of the match, for you have the self same
office with a mass Priest though refined. If he be ordained by a Bishop (though
it be the Bishop of Rome) he may minister in any Church of England by virtue of
that ordination. Andbesides masse-Preists preach some and those the mayne
truths, and the Ministers in England neither do nor dare preach all, no nor
some which (it may be) the others do.

Is it not better then for the servants of the L. Iesus to exercise and aedify
themselves according to the model of grace received, though in weaker measure,
then to be so simple as to come to your feasts, though you cry never so loud
unto them, thinking that because your stolen waters are sweet, and your hidden
bread pleasant, that they have no power to pass by, but must needs become your
guests?

And here (to use the Pistlers words,) it is well to be marked by the Reader,
how the Church when these things were written, enjoyed as a Pastor, so a
judicious Ruling Elder too, and their company greater by far then it was, when
that letter was framed.

Such as write of the Government of Commonwealths doe hold it for a rule, that
to redress abuses in any State, a better Way cannot be taken, then to have
things brought to their first institution. Hence it is, that the Venetians,
have a supreme Magistracy, which they call A Syndicate that once in a few
years, ^ survey^ all the Offices and dignities in their wealth that so all
things may continue and stand entire, according to the rules and precepts of
their first Constitutions and Ordinances.

If the Pistler had desired the common good of that Church: he would have
sought, to have had things reduced to their primitiue Original, and good
beginning: and not Mention as he doth, their depriuations, declinations,
departures ser^en^ qualitas vi^i dignoscitur.: as a rule for all Posterity to
measure their faith and actions by. It is an infallible maxim, (as D: Usher De
Christianor Eccl. success. et stat^ cap. 1. page. 19. and other observe out of
Tertullian Id verum quodcunque primum. id adultorum quote cunque posterius.)
whatsoever is first, that is truest, and what comes after is adulterate. The
first in any kind, or sort of things is truest and best: so Field.

3. But admit there were many that held this hearing lawful, and so have don
along time, what of this; is the thing he better for that? in no wi^e: For not
custom or multitudes must be followed, but the truth of Gods word. Walk ye not
in the statutes of your fathers, I. Of the Church. l. 2. c. 5. p. 49. neither
Observe their judgments, nor defi^e your selves with their idols Ezech. 20. The
like precept we have, in 3: ^ch: 11. Follow not that which is evil, but that
which is good.

Cyprian and others of the Fathers (as they are called) speak well to this
purpose: we must Non debemus attende^e quid alius ante nos f^cerit aut
faciendum putauerit sed quid ante omnes est Christus prior fecerit. Cyp^ Epist.
63. not regard what others did be fore vs, or thought fit to be don, but what
Christ did who was before all. We Must non est de consuetudene praescribendum
sed ration vine cendum. Epist. 74. not prescribe upon custom, but persuade by
reason. Whatsoever Tertullian lib de vi^g: savours against the truth, it is
heresy be the practice thereof, never so ancient. Non isle tantum in religion
fugienda, quae Verbo dei adversantur: sed ea etiam quae verbo dei, non sunt
praescripta, etiamsi ab acutissimis hominibus excogitata, a doctissimis
defence, et diuturna consu etudine recepta. Not only in religion must we avoid
all things contrary to the word of God; but also whatsoever is not therein
prescribed: o Polanus Comment: in Ezec: 20 page: 481. yea howbeit the same
should be devised by the acutest men, defended by the most learned, and
received by long custom.

Then we serve God, p. Fox Act. and mon: p. 18 29. when in his worship, we
follow his word, and not mans fantasies, custom, multitude andc: so Bradford
the martyr.

Thus we have (according to his entreaty) taken a view of his two things, the
which are so vain and frivolous, as indeed deserved no answer. yet least any of
that faction should think we passed them over without any examintion, because
we feared the weight and force thereof: I have briefly replied: and desire the
humble and godly Reader, to con^ider what both have written.

SECTION: 3.
^The Epistoler having ended his two observations, prepares now himself in the
next place (in earnest) for disputation Dulls bell^ in expertise.: And first of
all, (after some spiteful words cast on his opposites,) like Thraso in Terence
(who thought himself a none-such, o. Metuebant omnes jam me. in Eunuch: and
thereupon boastingly praises himself: They are all afraid of me, Act: 3. sc. 1.
as if he had don some great pe^ce^ of service,) he daringly provokes who Et
calum territat arms. Verge. in Aeneid: will to reply, if their stomachs serve.
And because he will speak (omissis nugis) to the purpose indeed. He undertakes
to handle the point in controversy methodically: that is, to propound first his
opposites objections. And afterwards to give some answer to them,

First ( saith he) they object and say that we hold the Church of England to be
a false Church, and the ministers thereof to be Antichristian, and yet we go
thither to worship, and this say they is absurd.

His answer hereto is: Before wee answer directly to this objection, we shall
entreat the Reader, and themselves to consider of what follows.

Answ: we read of one Doria the Admiral of Genua, that fighting at sea against
the Saracens, he fetched his course so far about to gain the wind, that he
could never come to strike a blow before the battle was ended. The Epist: is
here fallen into such a wild and wandering course, for seeking to get some
advantage by windy words, he goes quite away from the thing which he
propounded, and comes not again to speak either much or little of it.

But no marvel our new moister It seems the Pissed: is one of Antontes scholars
mentioned in Tulle, who vvisheth men if they be troubled about a hard question
to say nothing to it. hath showed vs such a trick: Cic, de orate, l. 2, the
truth is (as one D. Couel, Church Government. c, 1, p* 5, speaks in the like
case) he made the objection stronger then he was able to answer: Better
therefore to be silent then light a candle to discover his own nakedness.

But it may be he, or others of that side, will be the more willing to reply,
if they shall se this argument laid down in some better form. If that will doe
it, we will doe our best to make way for them. Thus then we reason.

To worship God in any other way or manner, then he hath in his word
prescribed, is unlawful:

But to hear Antichristian Ministers in false Churches, is to worship God in a
way and manner which he hath not prescribed:

Therefore it is a sin to doe it.

The mayor no man dares deny I assure my self: For it is manifest and certain
by the whole course of the scriptures. Deu: 12. 8. Leuit. 10. 20. psa: 119:
133: Mic. 7. 18: Hos: 9. 15 Ihon 4. 23. mat. 15. 3. 4. Colos 2, 8. 2 Ioh. 16.
17.

Moreover all sorts and sects of writers acknowledge this For a truth. Zanchy
Explicat: in Coloss: 2^ 23. page. ^19. To^. 4, saith, Deus et solves vult coli,
et eo solo cultu, quem ipse instituit. God will be worshipped alone, and with
that worship alone, which he himself hath appointed. So writes Luther, Comment.
in Galat. Cap. 6. page, 871. Omnis talis religio, qua colitur deus sine verbo
et mandato eius, idolatry est, et quo ea est sanctior et spiritualior in
speciem, hoc pernicior et p^stilentior est.

All such religion wherein God is worshipped without his word and precept, it
is idolatry, and the more holy and spiritual the same is in show, the more
dangerous and pernicious it is.

Brentius Qui^unque cultus ^ tam aut verbum ^ ta tum ab^st, ^ vt major^m ab^t ^
^psi ^ cap. ^, ^0, 2* a man of rare learning among the followers of Luther
saith; whatsoever worship is set up without the commandment or word of God, it
is so far from being acceptable to him, that a greater abomination thou can not
put upon him. the like saith Chrisostome Etenim quote fit iuxta dei volu^tatem
quamvis videatur improbum ess^, tamen omnino deo gratum est, et accceptum:
country, Quote fit praeter dei voluntatem, quanquam existimatur ^ deo, tamen
est omnium pessimum et iniquissimum. Of a truth that which is ^ according to
the will of God, although it seem to be wicked, yet it is altogether pleasant
and acceptable ^o him: ^ Contrariwise whatsoever is don besides the will of
God, and otherwise then he will have it don: though it be esteemed as a thing
acceptable to him, yet it is of all other the worst and most wicked.

Famous Iunius Election ^n Ion: cap. 3. ^. 48. writes so too, God will not be
worshipped either for matter or manner, but in his own way. And this is the
judgment of Calvin, Instead. l 4. c. 10 Sect. 30. Chemnitius, Exam. par. 1
page. 82. Cha^sanio, Loc. comm. page 328 Aretius, Exam Theol. page. 42*
Piscator, In deu. 12* Observe. 4. Keckerman, System. The^l. page. 401
Trelca^ius, Loc. comm. page. 10* D. Fu^ke, Refutat. of Rastel. pa. 339 D.
Androwes: Catach: upon the second comt: B. Jewel, Repl. to Hard. Art. 1. divis.
29. page. 604 and others.

Touching the minor or second part, I may spare all proofs, and send them to
their own consciences, For confirmation and conviction.

For: 1: That this hearing is a worship, the same is manifest and clear to any
that have an eye of reason, and any light of religion shining in them: None to
my knowledge (saving a poopish Parasite Hovvson. Sermon ^n Psal. 118. page. 78
or two) ever held otherwise, And they by men of better judgment Dr. La^ton* in
Syons Plea* p. 327. have been sharply blamed for it.

Again, that this worship is don in a way and manner which the Lord never
appointed, it is as clear as the sun at noon day, and cannot with any modest
face be denied.

The Treatiser Page. 37* confesses that it is no particular Ordinance left by
Christ: mark that: and, in another place, Iustificat* Separate p. 93, 94 a
false Church, saith he, is a real and substantial idol.

Also Re^giour co^munion. p. 37 Every such Government and ministry, as is not
commanded by God and Christ, is an idol forbidden in the second commandment:
and all subjection to it, is a bowing down to an idol.

To compare now all this, first with the scriptures: Is the Church an idol,
Abridgement p. ^3 the ministry an idol, the Government an idol andc. In the
words then of the Prophet: Hos. 14, ^ what have we doe any more with idols?
what agreement hath the Temple of God with idols ^ 2 Cor. 6* 14 For we are the
Temple of the living God? Is it not said: Little children keep your selves from
idoles. Again, my dearly Beloved flee from idolatry. But how? mente et corpora:
(saith Porous,) Comment* in 1 Cor. 10, ver. 14. page. 614 in mind and body,
that is the worship and reverence of Idols: And to flee idolatry, is not only
to absteane from it, but with all the heart to avoid it, as an abominable thing
and a most hurtful plague.

Again, a little after on the same place, whosoever ^ a christian, it is
necessary that he be careful, to keep himself from all idolatry, and the
occasions, kinds, and instruments thereof: so he.

2. To compare their former positions, with the doctrines taugh^ vs by learned
men. Iunius Sacrifica^ur atom da^nibus fi a^a ^co aut ^tu and modo
sacrificatur, quam prascrip^it dominus. in his notes upon Leuit: 17* 17* saith
thus, men sacrifice to devils, if they sacrifice either in any other place or
after other rite or manner, then the Lord hath prescribed.

B: Babington Comfortable notes upon Levit. 17. page. 130. writing on these
words, what mansoeuer there be of the house of Israel, that kills on ox, andc.
And brings it not to the door of the Tabernable, andc. saith: Hereby was
signified that only in the Church, by faith in the chief high priest Christ
Iesus, sacrifice and service accepted of God, is, and can be offered and don,
and no where else. And of this judgment was Deu. 12, p. 178 Luther, Brentius,
Exegis. in Ioh: 4. Calvin, and others. Levit. 17.

Touching the high places 1 Kin. 12. 31 2 King. 12. 3 2 King. 4. 14 Ier. 1^. 5.
Eze. 6. 2 and 6. 25 of which we read often in scripture. The time was when it
was lawful to offer sacrifices upon them, So writes Augustine Qua^st. 36. in
lib. Judge., Drusius Ad diffic^l. loc. Deu. 12. cap. 68. page. 571., Rivetus
Comment. in Hos. 4. 13. page. 148., and others. And so much our Learned
Ainsworth in his Annotations upon Leuit: 17. 5. obserueth out of the Hebrew
Robins. Before the Tabernacle was set up, the high places were lawful, and the
service was by the first borne: after the Tabernacle was erected, the high
places were unlawful and the service (was performed) by the priests. Thalmud:
Bab: in zebachim: chapt. 14.

Besides the Fathers of old, many hundred years there worshipped Brent. Amos:
c. 7. page. 43. almighty God, in spirit and truth. Notwithstanding it was
Israels great sin so to doe Amos 7. 9*. And the reason hereof is laid down by
Zanchie Comment. in Hos. 4. 13. page. 81.. Queen verb non habebant, cur debar
hoc facere, they had no divine precept for it: and wanting that, idcirco
fornicabantur, saith Mercer Comment. in Hos. 4. 13. page. 42.: they committed
therefore Fornication. Here also it must be noted, that in these places they
worshipped not idols Calvin. pralect. in Hos. 4. but the true God, Deum quidem
col^bant pa^um* sed ^li^i quam loco quem ^legerat: Iunius Ann^t. in 1 King. 12.
v. 4. and the sacrifices which they there offered, were according to the law,
1. 50 their intention and meaning good Lavaterus in Iosh: c. 22. ^om. 59. p.
70*: and the reason why they made choice of them, was out of devotion, and for
imitation sake of the Patriarchs Al^ed. prae^: 2. p. 370. cognit. ^eol, and
quasi caelo propriora Brentius Comment. in Amo: 7. p* 42 O^mp. in Hos. 4. 13.,
as being nearer to Heaven and the like.

Now if it were a fault in them, to cary the oblations under the law, to a
place (howbeit sometimes lawful, and where their godly ancestors had before
truly worshipped) because they had no commandment so to doe: Then certainly
more in fault are those, which (with the worship of the Gosple) go, where it
was never lawful publicly to serve God, and where their forefathers never to
this day, rightly served him: I mean to an idol-Church, and there offer up
spiritual sacrifices, in, by, and with an idol-ministerie: I say there being in
the word of God no one precept for it.

If the Pistler can show vs, what coulorably can be said, for the justification
of this latter: which the old idolatrous Jaws, could not say as well, or rather
better in the defence of the former.

In conclusion I shall desire every christian heart, unto whom the Lord hath
given wisdom, to consider seriously of these things. If the Prophet, only for
his civil eating in a place prohibited, felt so sore and greevious a
punishment: ah* what judgements then, may all such justly expect, who dare eat
spiritually any where, against the express commandment of God.

Was the Lord so zealous For the ordinances of the old law, to have his people
observe as the substance, so every circumstance: whether it respected the
place, the person, the time, or any other rite: and shall we think that now he
cares not, whether men be precise and strict in doing all the particulars
belonging to the worship of the new Testament.

Ought we not to believe, that as God hath commanded vs to worship him, that
is, to hear his word, receive the sacraments and to use other his ordinances,
so he hath also called, and separated unto himself a Church, a communion of
saints and holy ones, in, and amongst whom, those holy things are to be used:
And that we are to look in what fellowship and communion we receive the holy
things of God as what the things are, we doe receive. In a word ought we not to
be persuaded that as the legal sacrifices out of the Tabernacle or Temple,
within whose circle they were prescribed by the mouth of God, were unlawfully
offered: so all the ordinances and exercises of the Church under the Gospel,
don out of a true constituted Church, are altogether and every way sinful.

Unto the place which the Lord your God shall choose out of all your tribes,
Deu. 12. 5. 6. 7. 8. to put his Name there, even unto his habitation shall ye
seek, and thither thou shalt come. And thither ye shall bring your
burnt-offrings, and your sacrifices, and your tithes, and heave offerings of
your hand, and your vows, and your free-will offerings, and the firstlings of
your herds and of your flocks. And there shall ye eat before the Lord your God,
and ye shall rejoice in all that you put your hand unto, ye and your
households, wherein the Lord thy God hath blessed thee. Ye shall not doe every
man whatsoever is right in his own eyes.

But seeing the Epist^ler hath something to say, we will now give him audi^nce:
the sum of his long discourse is this.

A Church may be said to be false in diverse respects, as first in respect of
outward order, when the same is not gathered according to the rule of Christ.

2. In respect of faith and doctrine. To the latter we will not counsel any man
to go: but only the other. Howbeit he confesses this la^ter false and
Antichrictian.

Answ: Eu ipides. 1: Pantheus in the poet * thought he saw two suns in the
firmament, when there was indeed but one: it was the distraction in his head,
that made him so to think. I will not say, that the Pissed: when he wrote this
was in such a distemperature; But this I am sure of, their conceptions are both
alike: For where (I pray you) doe yo^ read in the scriptures, of two kinds of
Antichristian Churches; speak out man? show vs the place, the Chapter, the
verse: ingenious dealing requires it: As for your bare saying, it is far from
proof: To affirm or deny (according to Aristotle Propter nostrurm affirmare,
vel negare, nihil in re sequitur. De ^nterp lib. 1. c. 6) is of no consequence.
That some false Churches in some things may be less: corrupt then others, this
is possible; Notwithstanding if we consider in what respect they are both
false, that is, the ground and cause of their Antichristisme, or falseness,
here we shall see no difference at all; No two respects as the unadvised man
affirms.

For example, one harlot may committ more whoredom then another:
notwithstanding as they are harlots both, so it is of one and the same ca^se:
namely Fornication. The like may be spoken of other things, whether Animals,
vigetals, minerals: howsoever in goodness or badness they may differ, I mean,
as it respects degree, e Lib* ^. de prop necess c. 8 measure, quantity, andc.
yet in the Genus or kind they are one, and no otherwise to be considered. To
this purpose writes A^uinas Equines 1 Sent. did. 9, Scotus Super predicabili^
Qua^t. 18*, Porphirius Cap. 2. Sect. 32., Zarabel Keckerman, Systemat. Log. l.
^, c. 3. and others.

Besides if that be true in the Philosopher: Opposite sunt sinul in nature
Arrest. Tropic. l. 6, ^num est, cutus contrarium est m^lum. R^ctor. l. ^.
opposite things. in nature are alike. Again, this is good whose contrary is
evil: it must needs follow, unless the Pissed: be a false Teacher, that as some
Churches are visiblie true, in respect of faith and order: so others may be
true too, having only outward^ order albeit the members thereof have no faith
at all. The which astertion is not to be answered, but abhorred.

2. The ten Tribes which departed from the Lord, from his Temple, sacrifices,
Priests, alter, and other holy signs of his presence at Jerusalem: from that
time, and still after, were not Gods Church and people: so the scriptures show:
Hos: 2, 2, 2 Chro: 15. 3. Ier: 3. 8, Hos. 13. 1. Amo: 9. 7. This being so, I
would gladly know of the Pissed: in which of his two respects they were a false
Church? I take it he will say the latter: not only in respect of outward order,
but likewise in respect of faith, and doctrine.

If he grant this, as needs he must ( unless he have their spirit, whom the
Apostle 1 Pet. 2, 10 terms ^ prosumptuous and selfe-willed) note then the
consequence: as his respects are foolish, so the Church he pleads for hearing
in, is false in both his two respects. The reason is; because the Israelites
when they worshipped at Dan and Bethel, were not in respect of faith and
doctrine (to use his terms) more corrupt then the other now is.

And because he undertakes nudo capite bare-faced and boldly to defend
Antichrists cause: we shall expect in his next Pistle-making some thing from
him, which hitherto no man hath attempted: that is, to answer Mr. Ainsworth:
I^roboam^ ^pology in his Arrovv against idolatry. and the non-conformists
Course of Conformity* p. 161, 162 who affirm that the Apostate Jewes could
justify their way and course of religion: as well if not better, then the
other. In short therefore, if he can show vs what essential truths his
disordered Church retains, or gross errors rejects, wherein we cannot manifest
that the other went as far, For my part I will freely confess my error, in
being a long time persuaded omnia simile that they are both alike, and one no
better then the other.

3. Are the Lords ordinances with the Pissed: only matter of order? What is the
Church of Christ, his ministry, the right administrations of the Sacraments and
Censures, no points of faith: oh fearful saying. Not only is there wrong here
don to the scriptures, but also to many worthy Christians: For were this true,
they have sun in vain, their sufferings have been invaine: I mean, our
predecessors, and others, who have suffered joyfully the spoiling of their
goods, spilling of their blood, andc. I say for this, which according to his
writing is no point of faith and doctrine.

But we need not wonder, that Gods house and his Ordinances are thus slighted
of him? doe not all adulterers after they have set their unclean affections on
strangers, think meanly of their own wives, disgrace them what they can: so doe
Idolaters, andc.

Now I doe not know (this gentleman excluded) one man that hath affirmed, that
the whole outward worship of God to be no point of faith. Cartwright speaking
of this, terms it the substance of the Gospel T. C. l. 1, page. 48 Page. 26 And
in the same answer to Whitgyfe he writes thus: You say that in matters of faith
and necessary to salvation it holds, which things you oppose afterwards and set
against matters of ceremonies, orders, discipline, and Government: as though
matters of discipline, and kind of government, were not matters necessary to
salvation, and of faith. The case which you put whether the Bishop of Rome be
head of the Church, is a matter that concerns the Government and kind of
Government of the Church, and the same is a matter that touches faith, and that
stands upon our salvation. Excommunication and other censures of the Church,
which are fore-runners unto excommunication, are matters of discipline, and the
same are also of Faith and Salvation. The sacraments of the Lord his Supper,
and of Baptism are ceremonies, and are matters of Faith, and necessary to
salvation.

So Fenner Defence of Eccles. disciple. page. 33, certain points of discipline,
are of necessity to salvation, in such absolute degree of necessity, as is of
any ordinary outward means. Of which sore is the ministry of the word, and of
the sacraments, and of the censures of the Church.

Others of the Non-conformists. I could alleidge which say the same, as Parker
De pol. Eccles. l. 1, c. 11, pa. 30, Traverse Necessity of discip. p. 21., Vdal
Demonst. disciple. pref., Baines Diocese. Trial. pa. 50., Bates Pa. 60 Yea and
Conformists too; as Bilson Perpet: Govern. ch. 1, p. 3, Whitgyft Treat. 2, c.
1, divis. 2. pa. 80, Sutclift C^t. Bas. c. 2 p. 32, Lo Compl. of the Church p.
60. Add to these Scultingius Hierar. Anacr. l. 9. p. 1 the Papist. Who calls
Ecclesiastical Polity, the soul, joints, and sinews of the Church.

Besides howsoever the Pissed: puts out the whole external worship of God, from
being points of faith, yet the Reformed Churches in France Art. 25 and the Low
countries Art. 30 doe put this in, as an article of their faith. To be short,
that which he calls order, is in the Treatisers Iustif. separ: p. 348 opinion,
absolutely necessary to the Church, an essential property. And as D. Ames De
consc: l. 4 c 24. p. 214 saith, it cannot be a true Church that wants it. For
by this, the parts and members thereof are knit together. And this is true, as
in divinity, so in Philosophy. For Form (according to Aristotle 3 Phis: 3, 5) ^
is the reason of the essence. Another: Every thing is senceable by matter and
intelligible by form. Aver: in 1. de Calo. As things by the light are decerned:
so we understand the matter by its form Boeth. de vnit.. It is a known Tenant.
Form guys to things, being, distinction and operation. So Keckerman Syst.
Theol. l. 1. c. 17. p. 161, Timpler Metaph; l. 3, c. 2. Pr^bl. 71, 72., C^rlm
C. 6, page. 35, Scallger Ex. 6, S. 3., and others.

4. Seeing he holds it unlawful, to go unto any Church which is false in
respect of order and doctrine: it must needs follow, that all Antichristian
Assemblies are to be wholly left, because they are false in both, these
respects.

And touching the Church of England here pleaded for, what notorious errors and
abuses, she mainteaneth and practises, may be seen in her Convocation-Canons,
visitations, Articles, the English mass book, their manner of making of
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. To let pass the many scoores, of heathenish,
Jewish, and poopish superstitions, which the Nonconformists See Soldier of
Barvvick. Table. have in printed books branded her for.

And that the measure of her iniquity, Syons plea. may come to a speedy
fulness. Admonitions to the Parliament Altar of Damascus, and other of their
books. Let the Reader observe, the multitude of gross errors, which she hath
added lately to the former: And these not only in printed books, the high
commission and sermons in the court, city, university, and country averred, but
also allowed them by public authority: among sundry other. Romish erroneous
positions these. Sec Chovvne, Reeve, Pocklinton, Heylen, B. White, B.
Mountague, Shelford, P^imerose, Laurence, Studly, Coal from the Altar, Bishcp
Wren, and other Prelates their visitation Articles.

The Church of Rome is a true Church: That she hath never erred in
fundamentals, no not in the worse times; That personal succession of Bishops is
requisite and essential to make a true Church; That the Archbishops and Bishops
of England derive their lineal successions and Episcopal dignity from St.
Peters Chair, and the very Sea of Rome, and that we should not acknowleidge
them for Bishops in case they either did not, or could not doe so. That the
Pope of Rome or papacy is not the Antichrist, nor Antichrist yet come, or
revealed; That Crucifixes and Images in Churches are lawful, and necessary
comely ornaments; That Christ is really present upon earth on the high Altar
and Communion table; That Communion tables are Altars; Ministers of the Gospel,
Priests serving at the Altar, the Sacrament of the Lords supper, the Sacrament
of the Altar, and may yea ought so to be phrased, That men ought to bow to
Altars and Communion-tables, and to place and rail them in Altarwise at the
east end of the Church, and come up to them, and receive when there is a
Sacrament, and that Ministers must read their second seruise at them when there
is none. That auricular confession to a Priest and absolution are very fitting
and necessary; That the Lords day is no Sabbath; That it is lewish to call it
or keep it as a Sabbath; That it is not of divine, but human institution, not
with in the morality of the 4. commandment; That two hours only of it, is to be
sanctified, not the whole day; That Morises, dancing, sports and pastimes (yea
labours of men's calling, not specially prohibited by ^: ^maine laws, even out
of cases of necessity) are lawful on it. That men may fall totally and finally
from Grace; That they have freewill, and may exactly fulfil the Law of God if
they please themselves; That men are justified by works, yea by charity, and
not by faith alone; That men are elected from the foresight of faith and works,
and reprobated only out of the foresight of their sins; That there is a
universal grace given to all men whereby they may be saved if they will; That
Christ died alike for all men whatsoever; That preaching is an extraordinary
thing Welfare the Bishops who are true to their ground, for it is an
extraordinary thing with them to proach. only for extraordinary times, and
belonging to none but extraordinary men; That one Sermon in a month is enough,
and better then two a day; That reading is properly preaching; That Archbishops
and Bishops Episcopal jurisdiction and degree aboue other Ministers is jure
divino; That the Ministers know more then the Lay-people, the Bishops more then
the Ministers, the Archbishops more then the Bishops; And therefore what ever
the Ministers shall teach or prescribe the people, what ever the Bishops, the
Ministers and people, what ever the Archbishops, the Bishops, Mininisters and
people too, are bound to believe and obey without further question or dispute;
That the Popes Laws, Decrees, and Canon Laws are still in force, and our Church
ought to be governed by them, and our Ecclesiastical Courts proceed locally
according to them; That Bishops have power to make and publish Articles,
Canons, Injunctions, Oaths, Rites, Ceremonies, in their own names and rights,
and to enforce both Ministers and people to obey them; That they may silence,
suspend and excommunicate, (yea deprive and imprison) Ministers at their at
their pleasure without any legal cause.

That Bishops are not bound to preach so much, or so oft as other men, (though
they have greater wages, and so should doe more work.)

That they may Lawfully and laudablie neglect their spiritual functions, to
manage temporal Offices and affairs, exercise both Swords at once, and rule
both Church and State together.

Now, that the Reader may be sure, what I here set down is true, let him peruse
a Book entitled the Quench-Coale, and there he shall find all these Assertions
affirmed, in an Epistle written unto the King.

5. Whereas he saith, in a Church that is false in respect of outward Order,
there may be taught many sound and seasonable truths.

This I grant, for Iesuites and other Heretics, deliver oft-times many true
Doctrines: And what of this, may we therefore Lawfully hear them? In no cause;
For as one Vsus est Nabuchodonosor Musicis Instrume^tis in erection statue, ut
homines ad ejus honorem and venerationem excitaret. Pintus Comment. in Dan.
cap. 3. page. 195. saith of the Musical Instruments which Nabuchadnezzar had in
the plain of Dura, they were brought thither, that men thereby might be the
sooner drawn to honour and worship the golden Image. So truly are the Truths
taught in false Churches, a bewitching Music to lead people unto them, and to
cause them to fall down before the Idols of the place, set up by Worldly
Princes, against the express Commandment of Iesus Christ.

Again, howsover the Priests he pleads for, Preach sometime sound truths,
notwithstanding otherwhile they speak vain and foolish things.

Mr. Fox Acts and Monum. page. 1027 reports of one Hostius, who being in Gaunt,
was told that a certain Fryer there, used to preach good and sound Doctrine:
But when he came to his Church, he heard him justify Transubstantion, and
nothing else.

And the like comes many times to pass, that men reputed rare Preachers, make
whole Sermons in defence of gross Idolatry, and speak most reproachfully
against the way and worship of God.

This being so, I would know of the Pissed: if a man be present, when such
blasphemous Positions are delivered, whether he offend. If he say, No, then it
follows that a man may hear any one and any where, and his distinction between
hearing this Priest, and not that, is (nihil adversum) impertinent and idle. If
he say Yes, then it must follow (from his own grant) that no fal^e Minister is
to be heard, unless a man know before hand, that he will not speak perverse
things.

SECTION. 4.
THat the Church here pleaded for, is Antichristian and false: the Epist: doth
acknowledge. Yet (saith he) that worshipping of God, which consists in hearing
his Word, is warrantable for us to doe there: And so much he undertakes to
prove by this Argument.

That Preaching which ordinarily begets men to the faith of Christ, may
lawfully be heard.

But the Preaching of many Ministers in the Church of England hath and doth
ordinarily beget men to the faith of Christ.

Therefore the Preaching of many Ministers in England may lawfully be heard.

The first part of this sillogisme is proved out of Rome. 10. Where the Apostle
telling what is the ordinary way God used to beget men to the faith of Christ
tells us, it comes by hearing of the word of God preached, if faith comes by
hearing the Word of God preached (to wit, if that be the outward means) then
there is no question but that a man may hear such preaching, and any man may
blush for shame, that shall deny this: So that the major part of the Argument
is clear:

And for the Minor part they can not deny it, no more then a man at noon day
can deny the sun to shine: for if any man make question whether faith comes
ordinarily by the preaching and hearing in England, it is a great question
whether they ever had faith or no: yet because some are so gross as to deny
this, we will therefore: prove the contrary by this Argument: No puero gladium.

That preaching and hearing which makes them which were altogether carnal, and
so not capable of a church estate, to become saints and so fit for a
church-estate: That preaching must needs beget men to the faith.

But the preaching and hearing in England, made them that were unfit and carnal
to become saints, and so fit members to the true Church, which were not so
before.

Therefore the preaching in England and hearing the same doth beget men to the
faith. That the preaching and hearing in England hath done this: Witness the
Church of Leyden and of Amstelredam.

I cannot say of this mans Logic, as Aristotle ^. did of Theodorus his making
of Epithets, it is his whole art. But rather if that be true, the Bird E cantu
dignoscitur avis. is known by her singing, then the Publisher is very unskilful
this way.

Touching his Sillogisme, the same is many waves peccant, as I shall make it
obvious and clear in the particulars following.

1. To reason from the effect of things is unsound and unconcludeable by the
Scriptures: This is, as if a man would say, the Midwives Exo. 1, 9 which lied
unto Pharaoh, did mvch good to the Israelites: Therefore they did well to Lie.

It hath been (saith Cartwright First repl. against D. Whitg. p. 79. the manner
always of wise and learned men to esteem of things by the causes and not by the
event: And that especially in matters of Religion. D. Twist The Doctrine of the
Synod of Dort and Arles reduced to practice, p. 5. 6. in his reply to the
Arminians: calls it a strange course, because a thing is useful, therefore it
is to be concluded that it is true: And a little after, they that doe such
things manifest hereby (saith he) that their case is desperate, and that they
have very little or no ground for their opinion out of the Word of God.

And this no doubt is most true, touching the Pissed: For were he able to prove
the hearing in question lawful, he would not have published (as here he doth)
so vain a reason: Or rather indeed that which hath no weaght of reason in it.

Tertullian, De praescript. adverse. haerec. Epiphanius, Haer. 38, p. 124.
Irenaeus L. 1. c. 16. and 17. and other Ancients: make mention of a Sect, named
Coins, which held that lutes did well to betray Christ: The reason they render
for it, is the same which the Pissed: here brings for the hearing of false
Ministers: To wit, the good effect Quonia^ per ipsum parity est nobis crucis
salus, and per hoc propositum supernoru^ revelatio., that followed upon it.
Thus he gratifies vile Heretics, in raking up their old ground, to build his
new error upon.

2. Seeing this practice of hearing, is condemned by the Scriptures: should it
be granted (the which I deny) that ordinarily their preaching begets men to the
faith: yet his proposition is unsound: For no evil may be done that good may
come of it. Rome. 2, 8 No, not the least to procure: he greatest good; that is
a true saying: E malis nullum. May not I lend God a lie Iob. 3, 7 for his
glory: Much less doe any other evil for any other whatsoever. As well the means
(saith one D. Slater Expos. on Rome. 3, v. 8, page. 308.) as the meaning must
be good. Hos. 4. 15, Mat. 7 Rev. 18 4 Son. 1, 7. So writes Porous, In Rome. 3.
v. 8, ad bonum finem, bone and legittima requirantur media. Timpler, Exerc.
Philos. Sect. de act. h^ma^. not. quest. Lavater. Co^ment. Iosh. c. 2, home. 8,
foal. 10. Unto a good end, lawful and good ways and means are required. The
reason is, ( D. Willet. Comment. in Rome. 3, Quest. 12, p. 154. Par: no sin is
eligible; for whatsoever is eligible, and to be made chose off is good, but sin
is no ways good, for then it should not be sin.

Moreover, according to this mans Argument, men may commit Schisms and
Heresies, for good comes of them; namely, a clearer Illustration of Orthodoxall
verity: So they may lie, steal, committ adultery, andc. because of some
following good effects: Which is the glory of Gods wisdom in his mercy towards
the elect, and justice upon the reprobates.

But this I know he likes not: Notwithstanding his and it (pedes ad caput) for
the matter of reasoning is all one: For thus he disputes; If the effects of
false Ministers prove good: Then may they lawfully be heard: But the first is
true: Therefore the second.

But stay, the consequence follows not: For non mox bonum est, ex quo bonum
sequitur; saith a judicious Writer. Comment, in 1 Cor. 11. We may not straight
way say the thing is good, because good followed of it.

As for the good effect it is not perse, or ^: But ex accident, as Logicians
Dionis. Areopag. c. 4, de divine. nom: Fr. Pieolomen. in Doct. Ethica Rod.
Goclen. cont. Philos. Theol. par. 3, p. 85, Keckerm. Syst. log. l. 1, c. 13.
phrase it, By an accident. It comes, saith Lyran, In Rome. 6, ver. 1, ex
bonitate Dei, queen bone elicit ex malis. The like saith Theodoret. Lib. de
providence. foal. 85.) Deus malis ad bonum aliquod utitur. So Paez Cantic.
Moys. Text. 4. An^ot. 1, p. 67. peccata a Deo ordinantur in bonum.

To conclude though in evils of punishment, we may choose a lesser to shun a
greater. Yet in evils of fault election hath no place. For Divines Dispute
against Eng. Popish Ceremon. part. 2, ch. 1, page. 10, hold absolutely, that no
thing which is evil in the use of it, may be done, either for prevention of
evil, or for any good whatsoever, inter duo vel plura mala culpae saith Alsted
Theol, Cas. cap: 12, p: 210, nullum est eligendum. And Porous In Rome: 3, 8.
the like: Nec ullum admittendum malum, ut even iat aliquod bonum, sive per se,
sive per accidens.

3. The maine drift and scope of his reason, is not only untrue; But indeed
very dangerous, to say no worse of it, as rending to restrain people from
hearing the true Ministers of Christ. And that this is so, I prove it thus.
That preaching which hath not, or doth not ordinarily begit men to the Faith of
Christ, may not lawfully be heard. But the preaching of many true Ministers in
their Congregations neither hath, nor doth ordinarily begit men to the Faith of
Christ; Ergo, andc.

If his Argument in the affirmative be true: Tam form, quam materia; To say
nothing of mood and figure. Then in the negative this is true also, according
to that known rule, parium par est ratio: There is alike reason of things
alike. So in the Philosopher: Arrest: Eth: c. ^ Contrariorum est eadem ratio.
For instance, let it be in the affirmative thus; The godly please God; Must it
not on the contrary follow: The ungodly displease God.

To apply this: If this be a reason and ground, why some Ministers ought to be
heard; Namely, because true conversion ordinarily follows their Ministry. If
this [I say] be a main cause that they should be heard; Then surely it must
follow: Where such effects of ordinary conversion appear not; There must be no
hearing. I say such Ministers are to be rejected, be they in their places never
so painful and conscionable.

This being so, mark the inference: Noah preached a 120 years, and yet there
followed no ordinary conversion in the old World. The like may be said of
Alias, Isaiah, Ieremie, Ezechiel, and other Prophers; Therefore it was not
lawful to hear them.

Hath not the Pissed: here showed himself an acute disputer; For to build
Babel, he pulls down Bethel; To justify false Prophets, he condemns the true.
In a word, whiles he seeks to ope^ a door unto the Synagogues of Satan, he
shutteth up the way and passage unto the Courts of the Lord of Host. Had he
thought on the Wisemans P^o: 16, 20 saying, I think he would not have written
so unaduisedly. He that handles a matter wisely, shall find good.

4. For the proof of his Major, there is not one sound sentence in it.

For 1. touching the disdiapason or il-favoured coupling of the matter. The
Scripture he alleges is Rome. 10, verse. 17. Faith comes by hearing the Word of
God. Now, what of this? His Argument hence is not proved, neither doth this
place, Rome. 10. look that way. For example, suppose I should lay down this
Position, the ordinary way to have right, between man and man, is to seek unto
the lawful Magistrate: Would any one ( unless he had Boeoticu^n ingenium) hence
infer, that those who had right ordinarily done them by Usurpers and Tyrants,
did well to take it.

2. The hearing there mentioned, is not (as the Pissed: imagines) a hearing
promiscuously of all preachers, but it respects such only, as (legitime vocati)
have a true outward calling to the Ministry. Thus Tertsllian Lib. co^t.
Mareien., Danaeus Comme^t. in 1. Tim. 5 22., O^colampadius In Esae 52, Mayer On
Jam. 3, Doct 3, p. 179., Porous On the place., Guiliaudus Id., Bozo It.,
Piscator In Rome. 10. Obser. in ver. 17., and others understand the place;
Therefore should his words be cast into a form, the very expression will be
confutation enought; For so they must run. If the Apostle, Rome. 10, say, that
the ordinary means of men's conversion is by hearing the lawful Ministers of
the Gospel; Then may unlawful Ministers be heard; If he can make it hang
otherwise, he were best to doe it, and save his credit what he can.

Thirdly, Paul Rome. 10, speaks of the ordinary way, which God hath ordained to
begit faith; But the practice here stood for by the Publish. is quite another
thing: Even a tempting of God; For as the Learned Muscul. in Mat. 4, Tom. 1, p.
47. Molar. in Psa. 78, v. 18. p. 684. P. Mart. Loc. Com. Clas. 2, c. 4, p. 209.
Polan. Syntag. l. 9, c. 8, P. 596. well observe, God is tempted, when men,
leaving the ordinary and appointed means, use their own devise; to obtain
either spiritual or temporal good thereby.

That this hearing is so, we have in part proved, and more will, if God permit.

Now, for his Minor. 1. All Sects doe boast of the effects of their Ministry in
converting men unto Christianity. Bellarmine De not. Eccles. lib. 4, c. 12
tells us, that Iew^s Gentles, and Turks too, are converted in multitudes by
their Church. Another Masse-Priests supplication to the King, Sect. 31. lays
down the particulars, viz. Bessites, Dacians, Getes, Scythians, Morins,
Nervians, Armenians, Huns, Burgunnians, Scots, French Pictes, Bavartans, and
well nigh an hundred other Nations are there reckoned up. The Arrians in old
time said Freculphus in Chronico Tom. 2, l. 4, c. 20. no less: By their
Ministers the Gothes and others, were turned to the saith from Paganism. But
this is not proved or true, because they say so.

2. If it were needful, I could bring their own testimony against him. For (to
use Mr. Robinsons Justificat. Separ. p. 51. words) there is nothing more common
both in the Sermons and Writings of the forewarder sort, then their complaints
how little good their preaching hath done. For Example, mark what some
Ministers of good note among them doe affirm.

This J dare warrant ( saith Mr. Gifford Country Divinity, foal. 48.) if it be
not so let me loose both my ears, that go through the Parishes of these grave
and learned Divines, and unless such as run to such their victuals otherwhere,
ye shall not find five among five skore, which are able to understand the
necessary grounds and principles of religion. Another Catholic Conference, p.
164. saith more: Were it not for the good Laws of our Kingdom, which doe
constrain and compel men to make outward profession, the greater number of our
people of all sorts in this Island, would make none at all. Mr. Nichols P. 218.
in his Plea of the innocent, reports, that conferring with the particular
persons in his Parish (after he had preached some good space among them) about
the means of salvation, of 400 Communicants be scarce found one, but that
thought and professed a man might be saved by his own weldoing, and that he
trusted he did so live, that by Gods grace he should obtain everlasting life,
by serving God and good Prayers.

This being so, what credit is to be given to the Pissed: Minor. Seeing the men
he speaks for, give in their evidence and witness against him.

3. Howsoever many living in jdola^rous places are converted; yet how knows he,
that the preaching in question doth it. For private men and wemon, may and doe
turn their neighbours from evil, and that ordinarily: som^ime by teaching, and
witnessing the truth, otherwhile by reading, talking, conferring of the
Scripture, informing their Children and family in the faith. And this the
Scripture Levit. k. 27, 28, Prove. 31. 26, Ma^. 3, 16, Mat. 18, 15, Jam. 5, 19,
20, 1 Cor. 14, 24, Act. 8, 4, 26, 1 Cor. 7. 16, Ephes. 64, Deu. 6, 7. shows,
and the Treatiser Iustif. Sep. p. 457, acknowledges; D. Fulke In Rome. 10, ver.
15, in his answer to the Rhemists, shows out of Ruffinus; how divers great
Nations have been converted by men and women out of office: As a great Nation
of the Indians, by Aedesius and Frumentius; The Country of Iberians by a
captive woman.

And here by the way, this may serve to his demand: Let them tell us where they
have received their faith? We answer, the wind blows where it listoth. Sure we
are, faith we had, when we left our unsanctified standings there; But if any
should hence affirm, that we had it by hearing false Ministers, he should show
folly and rashness. Secret things Deu. 29, 29. belong to the Lord; Quae supra
nos nihil ad nos. Augustine Melius est dubitare de occultis, quam litagare de
incertis Lib, 8, c. 5. de Trinit. advises us well: It is better to doubt of
secret things, then to strive for uncertain things.

If the Pissed: had minded this, I think he would not have written so
peremptory in a matter unknown.

4. Where reads he in* Gods Book, that men are named visible saints, and judged
firt matter for Church estate, they being in the mean while actually members of
false Churches, and practise daily gross idolatry.

I think with the Treatiser Iustific. Separ. page. 269., true visible
Christians, have Christ for their King, visibly or in outward appearance, and
so far forth as men can judge: (For by visible, we mean that which may be seen
of men, opposed to invisible which only God sees,) for Christ is not divided,
but look to whom he is a Priest to save them, and a Prophet to teach them, to
the same persons he is also a King to reign over them.

That Christ then should be said to be a King, unto any people continuing
members of Antichrists Kingdom: Or that such ought to be deemed visible saints,
and firt matter for a true Church, which live under a false Ministry, Worship;
and Government. For my part, as yet I cannot see reason for it; But think the
word is against it. Rev. 14, 45, Ephes. 2, 20. Deu. 33, 3 Esa. 4, 34, Rome. 1,
7. 1 Cor. 1, 2 Philip. 1. 1

If a man should give up his name unto a Usurper, take his part, obey his
precepts, join with him in rebellion and treason? May he for all this, be
counted (and that justly) a visible good subject unto his King. To me it is
fide majus.

For his wordy and windy insultation; That any man may blush for shame that
shall deny this; I pass it by, wishing him hereafter to lay things down
according to allegata probate; Let the Scripture speak Sanctis Scriptures non
loque^tibus quis loquitur; Ambr. de la. Gent. l, 2, c. 3, Tom. 2. in the points
between us: For without it, nothing is to be affirmed Omne quote loquimur
debemus affamare de Scriptures sanctis. Hierom. in Ps. 98 Tom. 8.: and beyond
it, nothing to be concluded Nihil ultra quam sacris literis proditum est
definiendum. Erasm. in Hiliar.: Gods word alone is certain, other proofs
uncertain and false, if they descent from it. Solum Dei verbum certum: caetera
false si dissentia^t. Ferus in Epist. ad Rome. c. 3. p. 303.

5. Howsoever it is true (as Polanus Comment. in Ezech. cap. 16, page. 365.,
Deering 23. Lecture on Epistle to the Hebr., Whitaker Rome. Pont. Cont. 4
Quaest. 5, page. 681., and others say) in a false Church by the preaching
there, some sometimes are brought to the faith: yet (with these) I deny, that
this is an ordinary work, but rather extraordinary; The reason is, because
their hearers generally by their Doctrines, are kept in blindness, idolatry,
wilworship, andc. So that they fit not members to true Churches, but unfit them
rather; For no sooner see they a man to set his face that way, but they seek
immediately, to keep him from it (nolens volens) either by flattery,
persecution or the like.

Lastly, if there be any weaght of reason in his words, they make then against
himself, and quite overthrow his own cause. And thus I prove it: No man can
lawfully hear false Ministers, unless he know before hand that they have and
doe ordinarily begit men to the faith: But such fore-knowledge is not to be
had: Ergo, andc.

The proposition is certain by his own grant; For the maine ground whereon the
whole weaght of his matter relyeth, is this, viz: that some Antichristian
Ministers ought to be heard, because they have and doe ordinarily begit men to
the Faith: Now, this must needs be understood of that which is visible, for
otherwise (n^que Coelum neque terram attingit) he speaks idly and from the
point.

The Assumption cannot possibly be denied, except men will be senseless; For
who can say upon certain knowledge, that any false Minister in the world, hath
and doth ordinarily begit men to the faith. Thus the man is snared in his own
words; And may say with the Poet: maize

Before I end this point, I think i^ good to present here unto the Readers
view, one observation or two, from the Pissed: Argument.

1. Howsoever he saith but little, yet that which he saith is so abstruse,
dark, full of evasions and starting holes, as a man cannot tell what to make of
it. He sends us to the effect of preaching: But to what end is this? What
light? What information can a man take hence: considering that as God is the
Author of true faith, so the time, instruments, means, andc. by which he
exhibiteth it unto man, is known only to himself, and not to others of others.

Indeed here we may observe a clear difference between truth and falsehood;
Between Christs institutions, and mans inventions. Whatsoever God will have us
to doe, or not doe, he lays down the same openly, precisely, manifestly: All
the words Pro. 8. 9. of his mouth are plain unto him that understands. The
spirit speaks expressly: 1. Tim. 4, 1. Non obscure, and in voluie: Sed
manifest, praecripte, praecise, saith Guilia^dus. Comment. on good the place.
VVhereunto accords Augustine: Divinitus visu^ est, ut sacra Oracula simplici
and pershicuo exararentur dictionu ^enere, no praetendere quisquam posit nihil
a se, in illis intelligs Ad vonsianum It was thought good unto Almighty God,
that the Scriptures should be penned in a simple and plain kind of speech,
least any man should pretend, that he could understand nothing in them. Another
Sam: Bachelor Sermon. Camp Royal, p. 36. Gods Oracles are plain, and labour
with no ambiguities, like those of Pyrrhus, and Croesus, whereof no certain
meaning could be gathered.

That the truth is simple and plain, Ethnickes by the light of nature, could
sufficiently see into such things. One of them touching this matter, saith
thus: Veritatis sermo est simplex and apertus nec varijs indiget
explicationibus and ambagibus; sed iniusta causa cum per se sit morbida,
necessario indiget astutis pharmacis. Euripid. The truth is simple and plain,
and needs is not variety of windlaces and fe^chings of matter about the bush:
But an evil cause in that it is sick and deseased, hath need to have a cunning
plaster set unto it. Another Aristo. of them hath these words: That phrase and
form of speaking hath truth in it, which is common and used of all, having in
it nothing craftily devised, neither cloking some other thing then is
professed.

Contrariwise when Satan speaks by his instruments, he speaks so ambiguously
and clokedly, as fitly, that of Apollos Oracle may be applied to it: ^. Quote
ambiguis ambagibus respo^sa consulentibus daret. For one knows not how to take
it, nor which way to apply it. Pertinently to this purpose writes Sibelius
Desacrific. Abra. p. 56, 57.: Human Doctrines are various and ambiguous,
wrapped and foalded with abstruse labrynths of opinions, whereby peoples minds
are so troubled and tyred, that they cannot plainly open themselves, neither
have any quietness, or come to their desired end. But the Doctrine of God is
right, that is, plain and perspicuous, not wrapped with un-even and crooked
suttleries and delusions of Sophistry, neither leads us into by-pathes and
errors; but brings peace to the conscience, ad removes all scruples and doubts:
So he.

Sadeel Opera Theol Pref. de Meth. Theol. dispute. Error. 3. p. 8. writing of
deceivers, and the sundry ways they use to beguile the simple: Notes them to be
men affecting dark sayings, and seeking by mists and fogs of strange and
unfamiliar arguments, to blind their spiritual eyes, and puzzle their
understandings. And this is no late devise; For Augustine in his Book of
Heresies makes mention of the Heretics Marcitae, so named of one Marcus. And
touching them, thus I find it written: Obscurissime and quibusda^ verborum
tanquam misteriorum in volueris utentes loquebantur de Deo, ut stupere^t
audientes homines, potius qua^ intelligerent. They did speak darkly, and used
such a wrapping kind of words, that the hearers were rather astonished with the
strangeness of the words, then edified with any understanding they had of the
meaning thereof.

The thing being thus, the Reader hence (as by a light) may greedy help himself
to discern, on whose side the truth is, in the difference between us. Our
dispute is about Church-hearing: We say, that Christians are bound to perform
this service unto God, in true constituted Churches; There (we say) must men
hear the whole Counsel of God, taught unto them, either by lawful Ministers, or
by Brethren out of office; For confirmation hereof, we can produce many divine
precepts; Also the Example and practice of our forefathers from the first age
of the word hitherto. Besides, this is a Position, so certain and clear, as it
is holden in all Schools, written continually in Books, preached every day in
Sermons, taught in all Churches: So that (haec Momo ipsi satisfaciant) no body
can speak against it. Danaeus in August. haer.

Our Opposites howbeit they grant us this, yet affirm that in false Churches
Antichristian Ministers may be heard also: Page. 3. And this is not only (they
say) lawful, but in some cases necessary for all, of all Sects and sorts of
Christians, having opportunity and occasion of so doing.

This indeed they say? But how prove they it to be true? Not by any law of God
taken out of the old or new Testament: For that they cannot doe; Not by any
holy mans Example, for they know there is none extant? Not by any sound
consequence rightly drawn from the Scripture, for (quid si Caelum ruat Teren.
in Heautont.) that is impossible. What doe they then? as Ieremy Ier. 2, 13.
saith, they forsake the fountain of living waters, and hew them out cisterns,
broken cisterns that can hold no waters.

They devise certain obstruse, dark and ambiguous phrases and distinctions: As
of natural hearing in a Church, and of a hearing wherein there is Communion: Of
some Churches, false in respect of order: Others in respect of faith and order:
of hearing false Ministers, not (quatenus) as they are false Ministers, or
their Ministers, but as men gyfeed and the Bishops Ministers: of certain
effects which follows men's teaching, andc.

Thus their proofs are only their bare and bold affirmation: For leaving the
Scriptures, they use Paralogismes, fond cavils, and false arguments. The which
course not only shows an il case, but also manifests, that the embracers
thereof, are either ignorant people who cannot judge of things that differ, or
some, that have some men's persons in admiration: Or such as are unwilling to
suffer affliction with the people of God.

I could here mention some other devises in this kind; as an implicit
Church-covenant. A true outward calling which some have, to the Ministry from
their Congregation, but secret and unknown either to the Minister or the
people.

But I will at this time abstain from such by-controversies, and the rather
because I shall have a firt occasion to speak hereafter of it; Namely, when the
Undertakers have finished their answer to my former Book, and Mr. Davenport
published his many things that he hath to say against it. For so much he
insinuates in his Treatise between him and Mr. Pagit. Page. 282 283.

2. Observe again, to what gross absurdities his argument leads; For unless it
be only wind and vanity, these sweet collections must needs follow. 1. No
Minister coming newly to his place, is to be heard. 2. Before any are, inquiry
must be made, whether they ordinarily begit men to the faith. 3. If after trial
it be found, that they doe not so, then they must not be heard what true
Doctrines soever they teach.

Is not this workman-like done? (say Reader) hath not the Pissed: (omne tulit
punctum) made the way clear now, for the hearing of false Ministers? Truly I
think, except a man be partial in the point: And of his mind who said: Non
persuade bis e^i imsi persuaseris. Though you doe convince me, yet I will not
be convinced; He must acknowledge, that he hath made it doubt fuller then ever
it was, and such as were not well satisfied formerly in the thing, have enought
here from his own pen, to put them quite and wholly off.

SECTION. 5.
THe Pissed: having done with his Logic: comes in the next place to charge his
Opposites, with contradiction, absurdity, and speaking little better then
Blasphemy. A great fault, if true; But how doth he prove it? They say, it is
not the Word of God, as it is preached in Antichristian Assemblies.

Answ. The Publish: had done well, if he had published out assertion (de menu
in manum,) truly and faithfully. But seeing he hath not done so, I will here
lay it down; Thus it is: The word preached by false Ministers, is not that word
unto which God hath promised a blessing of increase. Or it is not the ordinary
way and means which the Scriptures speaks of, to begit men to the faith. Had he
so alleged it, he might well have held his tongue, and not talk so vainly as he
doth, of Gods Word, if Mr. Canne shall preach it; And none of Gods Word, if
another doe preach the same. For our difference is not about the Word simply,
as it stands in syllables and letters; But rather in respects the time and
place preached in, and the persons preached by and to; That is, as the one
being an ordinance of Christ, the other of Antichrist; As the one (that is the
word preached in a lawful office) being like Mount Gerizim under the blessing;
The other like Mount Ebol under the curse.

I will express this paticular more fully in this manner, put the case, a
Company of Rebels going apart, should take with them the Statute-booke of the
Realm, and set up among them, one or more to administer civil justice according
the contents thereo^, now though no man can deny but this is the Kings Law
which they have, yet as they administer it, so it is not his Law, or more
plainly, that is not his Law, which they administer, neither may any good
subject in such a case receive any administration at their hands.

The holy Vessels in Babilon were the Lords still, yet the Israelites there,
might not make any religious use of them; So in spiritual Babilon, the Bible
there is Gods Book; Nevertheless the Godly are forbidden to go thither, to hear
it, either read or taught to them.

We find under the Law a difference between the Creatures, some are said to be
clean, others not; But how comes this? Not of themselves, for so nothing is
evil or unclean; (for all Gods Works were created good; Gen. 1. ult. But in
respect of the use forbidden: So thouching Gods Word preached, in one respect
it is pure, in another not? How ^o? Not but the Word in itself is still good
and true. The difference is, because of Gods Commandment, he having as flatly
forbidden the use of it (taught or heard) in false Churches, as he did some
beasts under the Law. I would have the Pissed: to tell me, what contradiction,
absurdity, or blasphemy it is to say: though Circumcision in itself were of
God: yet as it was used in the false Church under the Kings of Israel: It was
none of Gods ordinance; If was Gods ordinance, if a true Minister in Gods
Church administered it; But if a Priest of Ieroboams making did administer the
same, It was none of Gods Ordinance.

I wish therefore the Reader, to note in what respect we place our difference,
between the Word preached in a true Church and in a false Church; We say in the
one (that is in the true Church) it is clean. In the other, we say it is not:
Nevertheless, if it be considered, as God is the author of the whole Scripture;
And as it contains words and sentences, so we say, it is all clean and good;
The reason then, why we say their preaching is unclean, is in the same respect,
that some creatures were unclean under the Law; Namely, in respect of the use
forbidden.

As the tree of knowledge of good and evil, hurt not of itself, I mean the
fruit, but the transgression after the commandment, the thing in itself good,
but the use forbidden; So Gods Word in false Churches (as that fruit) in itself
is good, but the use there prohibited.

And because the Publish: takes it so ill, that any difference should be put
between the same word preached in Bethel and Babilon. I will (to appease him)
add one word more. As a false and forged Constitution, makes a Church a real
and substantial Idol; So all that comes from it, is touched with the Idolatry
of that Constitution. This is a ruled opinion of many Divines, the State makes
all the public actions to be formally good or evil; For as the Temple Matt. 23,
17, 19. sanctifieth the gould, the Altar the offerings; So the ordinances of
the Church under the Gospel, are sanctified to us; That is (as Bucer In Mat,
23, v. 17. truly speaks) in the use of them made lawful to us, in that they
have their Rise, from a true and right Power.

Seeing then the Church in Question, wants a right Constitution, it must
follow, that all spiritual actions done in it, (whether prayer, preaching
Sacraments, Censures) as they are there done, are none of Gods ordinances;
though true it is, in themselves they are of God. Yet I say, as the Word is
there preached, the Sacraments there administered, andc. So they are not his; I
say not his, though in outward performances they are practised, as in true
Churches. But of this more in another place. In defence of Object. 15.

Another thing for which he blames his Opposites, is, their misapplying the
Example of Nadab and Abihu; I will here set down their words, as he reports
them, and his answer thereunto.

It was true incense which Nadab and Abihu took, to offer up to the Lord, but
because they took strange fire; and not the fire which was from the Altar, as
the Lord had appointed, therefore the Lord sent a fire to destroy them: So say
they, it is the true Word of God, which is preached in England, but because
they preach the same by an unlawful office, therefore the Lord abhors it: A
stranger collection I think can hardly be heard, for here strange fire is
opposed to an unlawful outward calling; which nothing can be more absurd, for
Nadab and Abihu had a true outward calling to Offer, they were the sons of
Aaron (saith the text) therefore if any thing hence might be concluded, in just
proportion, it must be to the Doctrine taught, and not in the least to the
calling: So that we may from thence gather thus much, that if a Minister in
regard of his outward calling true: shall teach any thing that is not from the
Lord, they are to expect Gods judgement for the same, and more cannot hence be
collected.

What Origin Non est periculum ut eec subvertuntu^ ullus fidelium, lib. 1 cont.
Cells. said of Celsus works, may fitly be applied to this mans writings: There
is no danger, least any faithful man should be subverted by them; For he talks
and not reasoned.

To answer: But are you in earnest, speak out aloud? Can no more be concluded?
What; will a little more be ( alien are) beyond the mark; So you say; But a
stranger collection I think can hardly be heard; Dicclare Teren. in And. For I
dare say, you are alone Solves sapit. here in your opinion; Learned men
generally give a more^large exposition of the place.

The scope of that text, we are taught by an English Bishop, Babington, in his
Notes on that place: We may hence learn and settle in our hearts, with what
severity the Lord challenges and defended his authority, in laying down the way
and manner of his worship, not lea^ing it to any creature to meddle with, but
according to praescription and appointment from him. Content he is, that men
shall make Laws for human matters, andc. But for his divine worship, he will
prascribe it himself, and what he appoints, that must be done, and that only,
or else Nadah and Abihu their punishment exspected, that is, Gods wrath
exspected in such manner as he shall please.

And this he learned of Calvin Alium ignom sacris adhiberi vetuit Deus, ut
adventities omnes ritus excluderet, ac doceret, se detestari quic quid aliu^de
profectum erat. discamus ergo sic attender ad Dei mandatum no eius cultum ullis
extraneis Commentin vitiemus. who upon the Place saith: God forbad other Fire,
andc. to be used, that he might exclude all inventious rites, and teach that he
detested whatsoever was come from else-where. Let us therefore learn so to
attend to the Commandment of God, that we defile not his worship with any far
fetched devises.

Iunius Peccatum in eo fuisse, q^od in ration divine cultus non attenderint ad
mandatum Dei, andc. Anal, in loc. mentioning their sin, saith: It was in that
they kept not Gods Commandment in the matter of his worship. And a little
after: They should not have added of their own any thing thereto.

Piscator Cultum Dei exten^um praecise ex Dei praescriptum exercendum esse:
itaque non habit hic locum bena hominum intentio. from the place, raises this
observation: The outward worship of God must be strictly done according to his
Commandment: A good intention therefore hath here no place.

Mr. Attorsall also in his Commentary upon Numb. 3. 4. doth largely declare out
of this Example, how God disliketh and disclameth men's devises in his service,
as trash, trumpery, and mere dotage. So Beda, Bruno, Brentius. Pelargus,
Chytraeus, Sarcerius, S^rigelius, Aretius, Borrhaeus, and other interpret the
place.

And whereas he applies it to false Doctrine taught by one that hath his
outward calling true. He may say in the words of that boasting City: k I am,
and there is none besides me; For this is his own devise, and it must live and
die with them.

The place being thus understood; Let us now see, if the same may not be (ab
uno de grammate) fithe applied against this practice of Hearing. From the place
then I doe thus reason:

All will worship and superstition is sin.

To hear Antichristian Ministers in their unlawful assemblies is superstition
and will-worship.

Therefore it is sin to doe it.

The first Proposition is grounded upon the fore-mentioned example: Levit. 10.
1. 2. and the same is without exception. The second Proposition is thus proved.

1. Lib. 1. vit. ex: cult: oppose. Col. 501. 502. From the nature of
superstition, which is, as Zanchy describes it a taking into the worship of God
more then he requires in his worship.

Hence superstition (as some derive the word) is that which is done supra
statutum; And in this respect the hearing in question, is superstition, as
being used in Gods worship, upon no other ground but mans devise.

2. According to the Schoolmen, Vel cui non debet, vel non e^ modo quo debet.
that is Superstition, when divine worship is not exhibited, either to the
person it should be, or not in the way and manner as it ought. And this is held
to be a sound truth by all Orthodoxal Writers.

Now, Equine. 2. 20. q. 92. Art. 1. howsoever the Hearers of False Ministers
doe exhibit worship to God, yet it is not in the manner and way that they
should worship him: And this is clear by the Treatisers own confession; For he
confesses that the hearing which he pleads for, Page. 37 is no particular
ordinance left by Christ. Again, he saith: It were to be wished, that no Church
Ministry were to be found which is not approvable by the Word of God,
notwithstanding any good act performed by them that posses it.

If I am not deceived, in these words he destroys what he built before: Is this
hearing no ordinance left us by Christ? Is the controverted Ministry so evil a
thing, as that every good Christian is to pray for its rooting up? How then can
it be both lawful and in cases necessary for all Sects and sorts of people to
partake with it. If this be not (ex diametro) cross work, and gross
contradiction, I know not what is.

3. This hearing cannot be free of superstition, in regard men are present at
false worship; The which presence (as the Learned write Praesentia est
communicatio quaedam in cultu, Slater. Epist. 1. ad Corinth. c. 10.) is a
certain communion therewith.

4. It is great superstition to approve, countenance, or give honour to any of
the ways of Antichrist. They that are sincere Christians (saith in Censure cap.
9. foal. 471. Bucer) cannot abide any thing that is his. The least show (saith
Vigandus Synapse. Antichrist) to please either him or his followers, is will
worship. Of this judgement were Iunius In Hos. 2. 16., Musculus Loc. com. de
^radit. p. 421. 422., Bozo Tract. theol. vol. 3. pa. 210., Mollerus In Ps. 16,
Zepperus de Polit. p. 72., Sadeel Contr. Monachos p. 70., and others.

Now, me thinks there should not be a man so void of reason, as to say, that a
Minister of Antichrist, as he is preaching by virtue of his Masters commission,
and under his seal and authority, may even then be heard, and yet no honour, no
approbation, no countenance, nor any show thereof, be given unto Antichrist
therein.

5. It is vicious and superstitious to simbolize with idolaters; The Scriptures
Levit. 18, 3. Deu. 12. 30. Exo. 23. 24. 2 Chro. 13 9. Levit. 19. 27. 28 forbid
it. And the Saints in all ages have carefully shunt it, as we shall show in
another place. But this Hearing is no other; For idolaters in this, are
imitated in sundry acts of their idolatry; In so much as Papists and Atheists
too, may well twitt our balters in the words of the Samaritan woman, how is it
that thou being a Christian joynest thy self to us Antichristians? Is it not
strange that thou who profess our Church to be false, our Ministry unlawful,
our Church-government Popish, shouldest yet come to us, and partake in our
administrations? Surely this argues, that either thou understand not the
practice, which thy grounds lead thee too, or else for some by respect; refuse
to walk accordingly to them.

6. Superstition is committed, when more estimation is had of a thing, more
dignity and excellence placed in it, and more regard had to it, then God allows
or can stand with his will revealed in his Word; And so much Zanchy Lib. 1. de
vit. axed. cult. oppose. col. 504. 505. proves by sundry instances; In this
regard also, hearing false Ministers, is superstitious, because that thing is
honoured and embraced, which we find not in the Scripture to be lawful: and
thus an idol is set up, tanquam Deus ex part, though not vt Deus simpliciter.

Thus I have answered the Prefacer: Now, how he will take it, J know not.
Cotes, a Thrasian King, breaking some vessels to pieces, was asked a reason; He
answered, that he might not be moved to anger at another for doing of it. Had
the Epist: been so wise, as to have torn his writing himself, and so not
published it, he would not (as it may be he now will) have been angry at
another for laying open the weakness and vanity of it.

AN Answer unto the Treatise.
SECT. 1.
WHen Satan cannot draw men to one extremity, he seeks to bring them unto
another. The truth of this, the Holy Scriptures 1 Cor. 5. 11. compare with 2
Cor. 2. 6, 7. not only show, but sundry examples also prove it in this present
age.

It is true (as the Treatiser saith) there are many who affecting alienation
from others, Numb. 14 35, 45. make their differences as great, and their
adverse opinion or practice as odious as they can. Deuteronomy. 1, 42. 44. A
moat shall be a beam with them, a knatt, a Camel. And hence through want of a
take heed, they become rejecters of persons and things which they ought not.

Again, on the other hand, there are not a few, who desiring liberty, and large
walking, and to have the credit and love of all men, use all their wit, skill,
and power, to have great things (I mean evils and sins) esteemed small things:
And what is small, that nothing. That so they may find a door of entry, to
accord and agree with others in unlawful practises.

Here therefore is the wisdom of the Saints, namely, that they shun both these
two extremities. Medium tenuere beati. And for my part of this later number, I
shall, while I live, profess my self (by Gods grace) be to both a Companion and
guide: That is, not at any hand to condemn what is to be justified, neither to
approve that thing which ought to be condemned.

There are two reasons laid down by the Treatiser, wherefore he penned this
discourse. 1. For the freeing of his own conscience. 2. The information of
other men's.

Answ. 1. J dare not think, but the Treatiser when he fell first upon this
point of Hearing, spake as he thought of it, and did nothing but what his mind
gave him to be right and good: But this makes not the thing therefore
justifiable; For as Martyr saith: Lex Dei is regula conscientiae. Loc. Comm.
Class. 2. cap. 1. page. 165. The Rule of our Conscience must be the Law of God.
Gideons Ephod was erected with a well meaning mind, but it became a snare,
^udg. 8. 27. and a scandal, and an occasion of great idolatry, and the
overthrow and ruin of his whole family. What hath this hearing been? but a
snare in Israel, an occasion whereby many people have turned aside from the
straight ways of the Lord.

2. I doe not see what satisfaction any man can have from his writing: Seeing
he hath not alleged any one Sentence of Scripture to prove the point in
question lawful. Omne quote loquimur, debemus affirmare de Scripture is
Sanctis: saith Hierom in Psal. 98. Tom. 8. But this he hath not done, only he
tells us, that Hearing is a natural action: Hearing is no Communion, andc. Now,
where this so (which is not in the sense he intends) yet it serves not his turn
in the least.

If a Thief, to clear himself, should say, that he hath not stolen such
particulars: Yet if he have done other things, he is a Thief notwithstanding.
So in this case, thought to hear false Ministers, be not a sin in such a
respect: Yet if it be in some other, the action is neither Lawful nor
necessary.

And here by the way, let me speak a word to you, whose warrant for your going
unto unlawful Assemblies, is only the Treatisers writing: This J doe affirm and
will make good against all gainsayers, that if the thing could be justified,
yet for his part he hath not proved it so, but hath left the point it self
wholly untouched, and taken up a by-thing.

Therefore what Alcibiades said of the Athenians, I may well apply to you, You
take things from other men, not by trial, but by trust, and doe them rather of
affection and will, then out of any sure knowledge you have of the truth of
them.

That the Treatiser made account to meet with Opposites, I marvel not: Only I
marvel, seeing he fore-saw so much, that he had not done his work to some
better purpose.

The first sort of Opposites are such who truly desire, Treat: and carefully
endeavour to have their whole course both in Religion, and otherwise, framed by
the holy and right Rule of Gods Word.

Answ. These cannot choose but be his Opposites, and that for 3. reasons
specially.

1. Because of his lightness and inconstancy in the matters of God: and for
that he seeks to build again the thing which hee had before destroyed. What he
hath said against this Hearing, the World is not ignorant of; and therefore
here is a fit place to lay down his own words, and to apply them to himself: He
sucks up his former breath; and eats the words he had formerly uttered, as
though he had either forgotten what he wrote before, or cared not how he
crossed himself, so he might oppose us. Iustificat. of Separ. p. 276.

2. Because the drift and scope of his writing, thwarted the truth, and leads
unto sin against the Lord.

3. Causes troubles in the Churches of God, and hinders many from receiving the
love of the truth.

But did the Treatiser think, that the closest walkers with God, would oppose
him in this thing; Then it must needs follow, he made account, that the loosest
people for judgement and practice would be the embracers of it.

A second sort is of them, Treat: whose tender and scrupulous conscience makes
them fearful and jealous of everything that hath in it the least appearance on
show of evil, andc.

Answ. He that will not fall into a deep pit, will not come very near to it in
his travel.

Gods people (saith Theodoret Co^ment. in These. 5, 22.) must be so abhorrent
from evil, both in Doctrine and manners, that the show of both ought to be
avoided. And thus the Scriptures 1 These. 5, 22. Jam. 1, 27. Iud. 23. Rev. 16,
18. press, and the Saints Dan. 1, 8 Rev. 3, 4. Luke 1, 5. have practised.

For his distinction between things only naturally good in their kinds and use,
and others morally, andc. I see nothing in it, wherefore he should desire the
reader to take knowledge of it. For as for riches, credit of the World, and
outward peace, here instanced, as they are good things in themselves, so they
may be desired, and in a right way and course Lawfully sought after.

For the other, namely, Hearing of the Word, obedience to the Magistrate, andc.
In these things too, we must keep our selves within the limits and bounds,
which God hath set us. For his phrase of streaning and gooing as near the Wind
as may be, J hope he meant no streaning of a good conscience; If he did not,
then his counsel is of no use at all: except it could be proved, that the Lord
requires his people to hear in the way and manner hee pleads for: a work (ab
Asino lanam) not possibly to be done.

As there are some scrupulous in things amiss touching outward Ordinances, and
yet faulty otherwise: So I believe there are many not scrupulous in things
amiss touching outward ordinances, and yet in their course of life, base and
scandalous enought.

But what of this, must not Gods House and Ordinances be dear to our souls,
because some men's conversation is not according to their profession? God
forbid. For in the holiest Society upon Earth, it is possible that there should
be wicked persons. When there was but 4: in the World, one was a Keen: when 8.
only in the Arc, one was a Cham: Among the 12. one a Iudas. The purest Wheat
hath some chafe with it; The fairest garden some weeds in it; Therefore let no
man forbear to practice any known truth for other men's lewd lives; only let
them be careful to doe well themselves: Morn for such as doe otherwise, and
seek by all due and lawful means their Amendment. And this is the burden, and
no other, which the Lord lays upon them.

The last sort he divides into 5 ranks; at which he either girds, or right-out
charge, with Hypocrisy, partiality, pride, ignorance, malice, and the like.

It is said of Timberline Richard Knowles in the life of Baiazee that he raised
war against Baiazet the fourth King of the Turks, because he refused to receive
certain strange Garments, which he sent unto him. I believe, had these men,
embraced the Treatisers opinion in this point of Hearing, they should not have
heard him speak so bitterly against them. But to the particulars.

Some are carried with so excessive admiration of some former guides in their
course, Treat. as they think is half Heresy to call into question any of their
determinations, or practises.

Answ. Howsoever we must live by our own faith; notwithstanding we are not
lightly to esteem of the determinations and practises of our guides, specially
when we know they are no reeds; but men stable and unchangeable in the truth.
He is a foolish traveler that will leave the way which he hath long kept,
unless he be sure, he is out. There is (as Polanus Co^ment. in Ezech. cap. 20.
page. 487. saith) a laudable imitation of Elders. That is, so far to follow
them, as they are followers of Christ.

2. J know none more faulty this way, then such as have learned of him to hear
unlawful Ministers: For were not these men superstitiously addicted to his new
devise, they would beware, how to reject (as they doe) the unanimous judgement
and practice of all Learned Men and true Churches, and follow the blind trot of
his single opinion.

Such as lay down rules to find out the truth by, write thus: What the Fathers
Quid-quid omnes pariter uno codemque consensu, andc. Vincent: Lirenens. cont.
prophanos hereat. c. 4. all with one consent have held and written, is a
necessary token to know the truth by.

Again, D. Field of the church, l. 3. c. 43, p. 175 Whatsoever hath been holden
at all times, and in all places, by all Christians, that hath not been noted
for novelty, singularity and division is to be received as the undoubted truth
of God.

If these Assertions be true, the Treatisers then is untrue. For not only are
all old Writers against it, but the most Learned of later times: Yea (and let
it be minded) all Sects and sorts of people, professing Christianity, abhor it;
J except only Familists: For they and he (^dem in lud^ dost,) are for the
pleading and practice here much alike.

Some again are much addicted to themselves as the former to others: Treat:
Conceiving in effect, though they will not profess it, the same of their Heads
which the Papists doe of their Head the Pope, that they cannot err or be
deceived. And this specially in such matters us for which they have suffered
trouble and affliction formerly.

Answ. 1. Wee are all more ready to blame faults in others, then to see our own
and amend them. Had not the Treatiser thought to well of himself, I doubt
whether he would so lightly have singled himself out, and become (as it were)
every mans opposite, Humble minds, are afraid to meddle with novelties: but
such as seek humane praise, imagine they cannot enought be observed, unless out
of the dreggs of Sophistry, they raise some strange quiddities, whereby to
cross truths generally received.

2. That any man should love and like a thing, because it leads to persecution;
That J cannot think; But this J think: There are some which doe profess and
practice many things (and namely this of Hearing) on no better ground or reason
but hereby, to keep themselves out of troubles.

There is also a third sort who bend their force rather to the weakening of
other men in their courses, Treat: then to the building up of themselves in
their own; half imagining that they draw near enought to God, if they can
withdraw enought from other men.

Answ. I cannot devise for what end the Treat. Aliquid latet quote non patet.
should seek thus to discover other men's nakedness, except it be, he thought
that the more vile and contemptible he made his Opposites appear in the Readers
eye, the easier he would be won, to embrace this his opinion of Hearing
Antichristian Ministers; a pretty trick; Much like that Lesson of the Cannon
Law: Si non caste tamen cause. But such shifts profit not, for a godly mind
will search and look into the cause it self; and not on the persons either for,
or against it.

To oppose a bad course, is meet and lawful, and should we be silent when we
are called to testify against it, we should make our selves hereby open
transgressors.

Touching the building up of our selves: This (as Iude Ver. 20. teaches) must
be in our most holy faith. He that raises up a House with rotten stuff, What is
there else in Babilon. will loose his cost and labour by it.

I know not what withdrawing he means from other men: if he intend a
withdravving from the Hearing of false Ministers, then I answer, they doe well
that doe it. For if the Temple made with hands, defiled through idolatry, was
odious unto God, how much more will he loath our Spiritual Temples (not made
with hands) if we suffer them to be polluted with filthy superstition. But so
absolutely we shall doe, if we doe the thing which the Treat: here contends
for.

A good man (saith Ambrose Lib 5. Epist. 30.) will be earnest and Zealous
against idolatry.

Another saith: Bradshavv on 2 These. 2, p. 130. The better a man is, the more
careful will he be to withdraw himself from it. These witnesses are true.

Fourthly, there are some to be found so soured with modines and
discontentment, Treat. as they become unsociable: If they see nothing
lamentable, they are ready to lament: If they read any Books, they are only
invectives specially against public Sa^es and Governors.

Ansvv. 1. As to be unsociable, is inhumaine and brutish, so to be careless
with whom we join in communion, is sinful and vicious. A traveler were better
go alone, then have one in his company that should rob him, and cut his throat.

2. This is not an age, which wants cause of just lamentation, considering not
only the evils without, but what perverse things are brought into the Churches
of God, whereby poor people are daily deceived.

3. That we should look into public States and Governors, there is reason for
it; and specially, if the same be Ecclesiastical, for else, how can we walk as
men of knowledge, and hold fast only that which is good.

Lastly, Treat. some think to cover their own both grosser and more proper and
personal corruptions, under a furious march, not only against the failings, but
the persons also failing of infirmity in matter of Church-order and Ordinances.

Ansvv. I suppose by Church-ordinances and Order, he means the Ministry,
Worship, and Government under Antichrist. Now, that some of ignorance submit to
these things, there is nothing more certain; notwithstanding this gives not
allowance to others others (knowing better) to doe so too. If there failing be
of infirmity, there is the more hope of their reformation, I mean when they
shall hear the truth taught, and see the Teachers walk closely in it.

In conclusion, the Treat: pleas the Rhetorician, and makes a show, as if he
could say more, but he will spare his opposites.

Ansvv. As for his mincing figure of extenuation (to let much pass) I like it
not; For he doth here no otherwise then if a These when he hath stripped a man
out of all that he hath, would fine yet be counted merciful, in that he doth
not murder him, or bind him as some others have done. Let any indifferent man
read his writing, and he will say, the Treat. hath not spared his opposites.
but short at them arrows of bitter words, and made them as odious and vile as a
man can doe. But blessed is he, that is not offended at the truth for such
things.

SECT. 2.
THE Objections undertaken to be answered by the Treatiser, are (as he lays
them down) of two sorts: Some of them are framed upon supposition, that the
Ministers in that Church are in themselves Lawful and of God; But yet not to be
heard by reason of the abuses and evils to be found in their administrations.
Others with-draw herein (and those the more) upon the contrary supposition: to
wit, that the very order and constitution of that Church and Ministry is papal
and unlawful.

Ansvv. For the first I have nothing to say to it. It being a point beside our
present dispute. Again, for my part, I am of his mind in the thing: that is, to
use his own expression:

Supposing a Church, and the Ministry, thereof essentially lawful, it cannot
but be lawful for the members of other Churches in general union, and
association, with it to communicate therewith, in things lawful, and lawfully
done: seeing the end of union is communion. God hath in vain united persons,
and states together. But he, who would have us receive the weak in faith, whom
God hath received, would not have us refuse the fellowship of Churches in that
which is good, for any weakness in them, of one sort or other. And this we have
so plainly and plentifully commended unto us, both by the Prophets, yea by
Christ himself in the Jewish Church; and Apostles, and Apostolical men in the
first Christian Churches; In which many errors and evils of all kinds were more
then manifest: and the same ofttimes both so far spread, and deeply rooted, as
the reforming of them was rather to be wished then hoped for: as that no place
is left for doubting in that case by any, who desire to follow their holy steps
in faith towards God, and charity towards men, and effectual desire of their
own edification.

What he here writes is surely true; for the Scriptures approve not of rending
away from true Churches for any corruption: I use the word any, because so long
as we acknowledge the Church to be true (whatsoever her sins are) a separation
from all communion with it, is utterly unlawful.

Our godly Predecessors had in them the zeal of God, and love of his truth; Two
things I would know of these me^ 1. Whether they think not that the primitive
Christians were as zealous and sincere as themselves. 2. Whether they think
not, that the Churches from whom they separate, have as few, if not fevver
corruptions, then such Churches had, in which the Apostles and other godly
people daily communicated. But how showed they it? Not by forsaking their
Brethren for offences, but in witnessing against them, and seeking their
reformation. But now (ah that I could not say it) some men know not how their
zeal like Iehues may be seen of men, unless they make public Schisms in
Churches; and this many times, not for any sin, that they can justly prove the
Church to be in, but upon discontentment, and because they cannot have their
way and will.

But of this no more now: For I purpose (if God spare my life) to set forth a
Treatise touching this very point.

The Treatiser in page. 23, Treat. would have us consider distinctly of
Religious actions, according to the several Ranks in which they may rightly and
orderly be set. And how we should conceive of them, a little after, he tells us
thus: Some such actions are Religious only, as they are performed by Religious
persons. And of this sort is Hearing (and so Reading) of Gods Word. The
Scriptures teach, and all confess, that Hearing of the Word of God goes before
Faith, for Faith comes by Hearing, as by an outward means. Hearing then being
before Faith, and Faith before all other acts of Religion inward or outward; it
must needs follow, that Hearing is not simply, or of it self a work of
Religion, and so not of Religious Communion.

Answ. That the Reader may the better perceive, how greatly the Treat: was
deceived in this matter of Hearing: as to think it not to be of Religious
Communion: ^ 1 Cor. 1. 9. 2 Cor. 6. 14. I will speak here a little touching the
nature of Communion. Philip. 2 1. 1 Each. 1, 3.

For the word: the Greek koinoneo, signifies to have a part, or share, in, or
with persons and things, answerable to it, is the Hebrew Chamber, and imports a
consociation, copulation, or meeting together.

Again, Communion is three-fould; The first between God and Man; The second
between Man and Man; The third between Man and actions; For the two later, the
same is either civil, or spiritual. I call that a civil Communion, when the
matter or ground of it is not in, and of it self divine and spiritual, but
earthly and temporal: For spiritual Communion, this is practised two ways: 1.
With persons and things: 2. With things, and not persons. Where there is a
foregoing joining of people together in a spiritual outward society, or body
Politic, there is a Religious Communion with persons and things. But where this
is not, there is a Communion with things, as the State it self, and the
administrations done by the power thereof. Howbeit, as I have said else-where,
they have no Church communion, that is, to speak properly, they have no
Communion with the persons, who are not in Church-estate or union with them.

And that this is so, the Scriptures 1 Cor. 10, 18. not only show: but also the
denial of it, leads unto gross absurdity: For if a man communicate not, in, and
with the Worship he doth, then it must follow, that he neither helps himself in
performing true Worship unto God, nor hurts himself to doe the contrary; And so
by this ground, it is all one whether I doe the one or other. But of this we
shall have occasion to speak more hereafter; Now to his distinctions.

1. It cannot be proved, that Hearing and so Reading of Gods Word, are actions
Religious only, as they are performed by Religious persons.

This is not so: for it is not the person that makes the action Religious; The
reason is, if the action in it self be Religious, it must then be reputed a
Religious action, be the door Religious or not.

That no man may mistake me, let it here be observed, that actions are
Religious, either in respect of the matter alone, or the matter and manner too.
I confess, it by a Religious action, we understand the later, that is, a thing
well done for matter and manner, in this sense, none but Religious persons can
perform Religious actions.

But if by a Religious action, we mean the thing it self, and as (eo nominee)
it is to be distinguished, from what is, civil, natural, worldly; then I say
again, it is a Religious action (and of this sort is Hearing and so Reading of
Gods Word) howbeit performed by irreligious people.

2. Whereas he saith, that Faith goes before all other acts of Religion inward
or outward.

This also is untrue: For men wanting faith ( witness Keen, Ahab, Saul, Iudas)
may yet perform acts of Religion. The Scriptures here cited 1 Timo. 1, 5. are
(extra organum) not to the point; For they doe not say, Rome. 10, 10. that
Faith goes before all acts of Religion; But thus, without faith, we cannot
please God by them. So then, note the difference between the Scriptures, and
what he inferred from them. Gal. 2, 20.

Without faith all acts of Religion are without acceptance with God; So these
Scriptures; Ergo (saith he) faith goes before all acts of Religion.

To his mis-applying here, J may well apply that in the Poet: Lucan:

3. Here is made true the saying in the Poet. Fallacy alia aliam tradit. One
falsehood or subtlety brings in another. Teren. in Andre. His needs must
follow, follows not, but it is an unsound inference from a false principle.
Hearing the Word of God, is more (though he deny it) then a natural action.
viz. Religious and Spiritual; He reasoned a specie ad genus negative: because
Hearing in some cases is so, therefore it is so in all.

If it be his meaning, that Hearing is a natural action, as it respects the
Organ or means, in, and by which a man receives the knowledge of what he hears.
Then it is true, according to that rule in Philosophy Relate esse simul
nature., Relations in nature are alike. But this is nothing to the purpose.
Arrest. in Categ. Relat.

He that eats and drinks bread and wine at the Lords Table; or speaks to God in
prayer; performs natural actions, I mean as the members of the body are here
used: But if wee consider either the Sacrament or Prayer in the subject or
object thereof, so they are not natural actions, but religious, and the like is
Hearing of the Word of God.

For his two reasons, they are of no weight; For 1. though the light of nature
teaches a man to listen to another, yet this proves not, that it teaches him to
Hear in the way and manner here pleaded for.

2. Were it granted it did: yet might the action be Religious; For the light of
nature Rome. 1. 20, 21. Epictetus a Stoic writes thus: It is before all things
to be learned that there is but one God; that he rules all things; that he
provideth for all; that whatsoever we doe, speak, or think, nothing can be hid
from him; that we should worship him as our Creator and Father, and the only
author of our felicity. Epictus apud Orion., leads us to sundry divine duties,
howbeit insufficient to guide us in the right manner of doing them.

3. I grant, a mere natural man ought necessarily to hear Gods Word;
Notwithstanding it will not follow, when he hears in a Church-way, that he
performs no Religious action. This is as if one should say, because a rebel is
no good subject, he cannot doe any civil service to his Prince; I speak not of
the aim of his heart, but only of a formal doing.

That which the Treatiser unjustly lays as a fault on Mr. Iohnson in page. 23.
is most true of himself in page. 26, 27. to wit, a want of distinction between
things. It is so as hee saith, Preaching by some, and Hearing by others, may be
performed without any Religious Communion passing between the persons preaching
or hearing.

This I say is right, but that which afterwards he makes one with it, is
different and otherwise; namely, that a man may hear a Minister teach
officially, and yet not have communion with the state of the Teacher.

I may apply here against him, that in the civil Law, testes dome stici
household witnesses are of no validity. This is but his own saying, said over
many times, and indeed argues more wit then truth, and sophistry then
sincerity.

Scholars are taught out of the Topicks, that it is ill arguing a consequenti,
when in two positions things utterly unlike, shall be compared together, and
the one by no means can infer the other.

I have proved before, that howsoever a man stand not in spiritual and
political church communion with a Church and ministry thereof, yet he is there
a participant or communicant in, and with the ordinances, as with the doctrines
taught, so with the state of the Teacher.

For the better clearing of this; Let vs in few words consider, a Church state,
Ministry, and administrations, make up (as I may so say) the body of divine
worship. Now it is a known Maxim quidquid est pars partis, est etiam pars
t^tius. The hand is a part of the body, the finger a part of the hand, he
therefore that holds either my hand or finger touches my body. So in just
proportion, hee that touches any part or member of the spiritual and political
body, hee touches the body or state, bee the same true or false: if true, his
communion is lawful: if false, he touches an uncheane thing, and ^o^ sins
against that precept in 1. Cor. 6. 17.

To end this Section howsoever hearing of the word of God, lies in common for
all, for the good of all. Yet hath God appointed away and order unto all, how
to hear it. Food and raiment lies in common to all, for the good of all: What
of this, shall wee hence conclude it is no matter by what means or course men
have it; indeed so he reasoned or else (Oleum et operam perdidit) he speaks
neither for himself nor against vs. Mr. Baines Diocesan. trial. p. 7. writes
well, no people can worship God in repairing to any Church, or ministry without
warrant of his word. Let the reader note it.

SECT. 3.
THe Treatiser for this opposites, hath framed 16: objections: the which (as
himself saith Page. 13. he hath either heard from others, or could conceive of
himself, ooulerably against the practice by him propounded. The first is laid
down thus:

No man may submit his conscience to be wrought upon, Object. 1. by an unlawful
and antichristian ministry: neither hath God promised, or doth afford These
words in a different letter, are the Treat. own, and we disclaim them. any
blessing upon it, neither can any have the sanctified use thereof.

His answer hereto is this. The office of the ministry works not upon the
conscience of the hearer properly: the office gives only power and charge to
the Teacher, to teach in such aplace: it resides in the person of the officer
alone, the communion lawful or unlawful which any hath with it, is in regard of
the lawful or unlawful relation and union foregoing between the persons, and
not in any working of the office upon the conscience of any: God may and doth
bless the truths taught fauls ministers.

Answ. It was Heiroms Paulum quotiescunque logo videor mihi non verb audire,
sed tonitrua: cont. Iovinian. censure of Pals Epistles, that when hee read them
He thought he heard not words but Thunder. This cannot be well applied to his
reply here. For should I speak my conscience, it is a mere Phraseology, words
without weight of reason.

1. He denies our first assertion: But how clears he it to the contrary? As is
his ground, so are his proofs: Only bare saying: Sit pro ration voluntas.

That the Office of the Minister, works upon the Hearers conscience; It is
certain, and not to be denied, without loss of credit, both to the person and
cause of the denier in the eye of all reasonable men: Exo. 28. For this is
evident by the Scriptures, whether we respect an Office true or false. Ephes.
4, 11. 2 These. 2, Rev. 9.

Again, if it be considered, what we mean by the Office working upon the
conscience; Common reason will prove it too: Our meaning is, that the state or
power by which he administers, is herein submitted too. As Magistrates are
obeyed in civil Justice, because of their calling, and were it not for it, men
could not for conscience sake receive their administrations: So the conscience
of a Hearer is brought in subjection to the ordinance of Hearing, even for the
Office sake of him that teaches; We intend here Ministerial teaching.

It is most certain (saith one Mr. Poetry of the Ministry of the Church of
England: Page. 37. 38.) Satan rules in the consciences of men, not only by
false doctrine, but also by his false power and ordinances; His Kingdom of
darkness not only consists in the lies and false doctrine, and worship which he
hath coined, but also in the false and Antichristian Ordinances, which he hath
invented for the ruling of his Idolatrous den: And therefore the Children and
Saints of God ought to avoid both the one and the other. So hee.

2. It is not true, that the Office only gives power and charge to the Teacher
to teach in such or such a Church-state. For properly it respects not that at
all, but rather the Office of the person gives him power to preach, pray,
administer the Sacraments, andc. according to their Order and Canons. He that
that hath not a Church-state to preach in, yet being ordained Priest, hath
power by his Office to doe the work of a Priest any where. And so much the
Treat. Manumis. to a Manuduct, p. 70. in another Book acknowledges: The Office
is the very state and function conferred upon a man by his calling, from which
Office arises immediate Note this. power, and charge to administer, and to
perform the works of that Office: In the performance of which works the Office
is executed and. power used.

And whereas he mentioned here, the truths they teach: J grant these are from
God, but the Office which gives them power and charge to speak them, is from
Antichrist: And a special Character or Mark (as the Learned Mr. Symon on the
Rev. page. 120. write) of the Beast. Thus said Iohn Chaydon, Acts and
Monuments, Edict. 5. page. 588. a Martyr of Christ: The Bishops license to
preach the Word of God, is the true Character of the Beast, that is of
Antichrist. The like Mr. Bale On Revel chap. 14. 9., and others.

3. Whereas he saith, the false Office resides in the person of the Officer
alone; Here I might take that exception of the Law In testimon. dig: de
testibus against him. They who wander against the credis of their own
Testimonies, are not to be heard. Against this, we have his own testimony; For
thus he saith Manumiss. to a manuduct. page. 5. those that partake in the work
of preaching of one, sent by the Bishops, doe partake in what lies in them in
the authority of the sender. And this is so indeed. The sinful Office of the
Teacher, becomes his sin, who practises will-worship with him: For hereby hee
enwraps himself into the guilt of the Office; And this thing by another is so
clearly proved Treatise of the Ministry of the church of Engla^d, by Fran:
Iohnson. Page. 5, 6, 7, andc., as no man can deny it, that hath any light of
reason or Religion shining in him.

4. What can be vainer said (our enemies themselves being Judges) then to say,
God may and doth bless the truths taught by false Ministers: A posse ad esse
n^n valet consequentia. To reason thus, is both against Logic and Divinity. To
dispute (saith King Iames A speech in Parliament, anno 1609.) what God may doe,
is blasphemy, but quid vult Deus, that divines may Lawfully, and doe ordinarily
dispute and discourse.

It never came into our hearts to think, that God may not bless the Truths
taught by false Ministers: But this we hold, he hath not in his Word promised
any blessing unto it. And in this Luther is with us. God blesses not (saith he
Co^ment. in Galat. cap. 1. page. 42., meaning by any ordinary promise) their
labour, who are not lawfully called to the Ministry.

The injunction Injunction 3. of Q. Elizabeth, set forth by public authority,
is much to this purpose. Works devised by mans fancy, (so is every unlawful
Ministry, and condemned as Cartwright Christ. Cate^h. of R^lig. chap. 16. Page.
98 saith in the second commandment) have not only no promise of reward for
doing of them, but contrariwise great threatenings and maledictions of God.

The Treatiser Iustificat. of Separ. page. 79. was of this opinion too, when he
said: The Lord hath promised no blessing to his Word, but in his own Ordinance,
though by his super abundant merey he oft-times vouchsafe that, which no man
can challenge by any ordinary promise.

And because the Treat. is here so brief, a touch and away: As if our Objection
had no weaght; I will therefore lay the argument down in this manner.

Such Churches, unto whom God hath made no promise in his Word, to bless the
things there done; ought not by Gods people to be resorted to.

But God in his Word hath made no promise to bless the things done in a false
Church.

Therefore Gods people are not to go unto false Churches.

The Proposition cannot be excepted against: For 1. The Scriptures prove it
clearly. Ier. 23, 21, 22.

Again, there is no duty charged upon us, Ex. 20, 24 but there is a blessing
promised, Psa. 134, 3 and 147, 13. unto the due performance of it.

The assumption is as clear, and thus we prove it.

If false Churches have not the promise of Gods presence, they cannot from the
Word of God, expect his blessing upon what they doe. But the first is true:
Ergo the second.

The Major, which is only controversall, wee prove thus.

If every false Church be an Idol Exo. 20. 45., and God require his people to
come out thence Rev. 18, 4., threaten to destroy it Rev. 20. 8, 9., and will
doe it, and promise his presence unto the true Church Mat. 18. 20.: Then is he
not present We mean such a presence of God, as by his Word we can be sure of
it. in the false: But the first is true, therefore the second.

Here I might name sundry learned Men, who give witness to this thing. Christ
(saith Reynolds De Rome. Eccles. idolat. l. 2. c. 1. page. 99. the Pastor of
his Chruch, doth tell us, that he feeds not in Antichristian assemblies; in the
den of Thieves, neither is it his will, that his flock should there rest at
noon: But in the pleasant pasture, by the still waters, that is in the shadows
of the true Christian Churches, detesting idolatry.

Another thus: They that doe usurp Ministerial function in the Church, Dr.
Slater on Rome. 1. Page. 8. cannot expect Gods blessing on their labour. Doctor
Ames lays it down as a reason why a lawful calling is necessary; namely, that
so they may expect a blessing from God.

It is true which these men say, for our ground for Hearing in church way is
not because the speaker is a man gifted, able to open and apply the scriptures.
andc, But because that which he doth is a a divine institution, an ordinance
charged on vs, to practice, and to which God hath promised his presence and
blessing.

Let our opposites show vs where it is written, that the gifts and personal
graces of the man, is sufficient to justify the hearing of him We intend
Ministerial teaching. a Chap. 23 2. but rather the reason wherefore we he are
him, is, because of the lawful calling which he hath to administer the holy
things of God.

Our Saviour as it appears by Matthew approves of the hearing of the Scribes
and Pharisees; But upon what ground, not because they were able to open and
apply, the doctrines of Faith by that Church professed: but) as Piscator saith
because they were called and ordained of God, Ado vocati at que constitute su^t
vt legem Mosis in Synagogis populo praelegant cumque ad ^ observationem
exh^tentur. Analis. in Mat. 23, v. 2. that they should preach the Law of God in
the Sinagogues to the people, and exhort them to the observation
thereof-Aretius on the place saith the like and adds, their calling bound the
people to hear them.

So then here wee see that men, being lawfully called to the ministry are to be
heard howsoever in some qualifications defective: but that such who have taken
on a false office, are to be heard th^s I deny: and ever shall doe, until they
show me some divine precept for it, as wee have for the other, which is (Tantah
horto fructus colligere*) a thing that they can never doe.

For his phrase Balaam-like to curse: I pass it by: only I think good to put
our opposites in mind, of that which is written in I^sh. 6. 26. Cursed be the
man before the Lord that raises up and builds the city lericho.

J am sure, God of old-hath devoted Babilon to destructio^: let men therefore
see to it that they bring not themselves under a greater curse, by using their
pens and tongues, to rise up again one part of the Kingdom of the beast which
the Lord before had consumed with the spirit of his mouth.

SECT. 4.
THE Treatiser frames our second objection in this manner.

To hear such a minister is to honour approve and uphold his office of
ministry. Object.

In confutation of this, thus he saith.

If this hee simply true then when the heathenish Athenians heard Paul preach:
Treat. or when an unbeliever comes into the Church assembly, an a hears the
preacher he approves, honours and uphold the office of the ministry.

Ansvv: The virgins in Cypryans time granted, they walked with young men,
talked with them, went led with them, but when they came to the act, they
abstained.

The Treat. writings here, and in all the rest of his Book, is much to the same
purpose: He grants, that men may walk to the Harlots House But the Word of God
forbids it, Pro, 5, 7. Lyran expounds this place of the false Church, Tom. 2,
p. 314., hear her told gueists, and yield to sundry dallying gestures (as
bowing the knee, uncovering the head, andc.) but when they come to the act they
must absteane: What that learned man Non est locus dondus Diabolo: Nemo dive
tutus periculo proximus, l. 1, c. 11. then answered, so doe I: No place must be
given to the Devil, no man is long safe, who is near the point of danger. To
the matter.

That our argument may appear strong; Secundam legem oppositionis (as the
Lawers term is) we will put it down in this form.

To yield any approbation, liking, or reverence unto men's institution in the
exercise of Religion is a sin.

But in hearing Antichristian Ministers, there is approbation liking, and
reverence yielded unto men's institution in the exercise of Religion.

Therefore it is a sin to doe it.

The Major cannot be denied; for the Scriptures Mat. 15, 19, Ps. 16, 4 Colos.
2, 20, 21, Deu 5, 9, 10, 1 Cor. 6* 17, Hos. 2, 16, Ex. 23, 13 teach us the very
thing. Besides the most judicious Writers affirm so too.

God forbids (saith Mr. Iacob Exposition on Com. 2.) all approbation, liking or
reverence, though never so small showed towards any institution and inventions
of men whatsoever in the exercise of Religion, yea all words either of tongue
or pen, tending to defend or excuse such humane inventions in Gods service.

I might allege. Calvin Sermon. 52, on Deu., Mollerus In ps. 16, 4. p. 108.,
Smilerus In Exo. foal. 90., Macabeus Enarrat. in Deu. 12, loc. 1. Vrsinus
Explic. Catech. p 759. Vigrandus Synops. Antichrist, Zanchy De redempt.
foal.90., D. Andrew On the Com. 2., D. Fulk Confute. of Allen. 378., Perkings
Catech. c. 16, p 96, Cartvvright, Ainsvvorth Annot. on Ex. 20 45., and others,
who in their writings affirm the same.

The minor is as clear: for 1. It is not possible that men can come unto
Antichristia^ churches to worship God, but they must by their presence there,
show reverence and honour to the public false state and ministry.

Note what an English Prelate Determinate. Quaest. 7, p. 40. saith, it
appertains to the virtue of truth, that as a man shows himself by external
signs, so he is indeed to be esteemed.

The Doway Annotate. in 2 King 5, 19, p. 771. translators of the Bible write
thus, such as frequent, or repair unto unlawful assemblies, for the public
service of God, by their being there are to be reputed of the same religion, or
else dessemblers: as it were to have no care of religion, knowing God and not
glorifying him as God.

Cornelius a lipid In Epist. 2. p. 505.) in his commentary on Iohn, saith,
false ministers are favoured and approved in their unlawful way, when they are
heard.

Chytraeus De Eucharistia, p. 317, 318. handled largely this point, and from 1.
Cor. 10. 14. concludes, that all false Churches are to be left utterly, because
(saith he) a mans presence there is an approbation of them, Rivetus Comment. in
Psa. 16, p. 53. adds this: Etiam si nemo ad confessionem adigeretur: Yea though
a man came not thither for confession sake.

If the fathers thought that the Christians could not wear garlants of bay,
Tertull. de corona milit. nor deck their houses with leaves, and green bows;
Nor sit after they had prayed, nor rest from their labour those days that
Pagans did, nor keep the first of every month as they did. Brac. z Tom. Can.
73. But they should countenance and honour heathenish ceremonies, and
superstitions.

If these fathers (I say) conceived so, of these things, surely then upon the
like, or better reason, may I conclude, that to go unto false churches, and
there hear unlawful Ministers is, to show approbation, liking, and reverence
unto men's institutions in the exercise of religion.

The Prophet Hose Hos. 2. 13. reproves some, for kissing the Calves: But what
was this sin. Porous In Hos. 13. 2. page. 557. Tom. 1. saith it was, their
bodily presence at false worship, by which presence they showed aliking to it.
So Calvin. Praelect. in Hos. 13. 2. page. 157.

Again, the point is further cleared, in that idols by this practice are
honoured. Observable it is, whereas on Evangilist Ma^. 4. 9. See Porous on the
place. (setting down the Tempters words to Christ) saith, worship me: Another
Luck. 4. 7. hath it, worship before me: Showing that it is all one to worship
before the Devil, or to worship him; Now, he is worshipped, when idols 2 Chro.
11. 15. 1. Cor. 10. 20. Rev. 9. 20. 1 Tim. 4. 1. are worshipped, or any false
institution are observed and practised: Yea (as Cartwright Hector. Christ lib.
1. page. 14. saith) ta^etsi ex amino, aut superstition quadam deceptus hoc non
faciant.

To apply this, the Treat grants, that a false Church is a real idol, apart of
Antichristisme, and of the apostasy of the man of sin; If so; then hearing
there, must needs be unlawful, because it is to worship before an idol, and
such an idol as that the worship there done, issues from it, as the stream or
river from the fountain.

To the particulars of his reply. 1. For the Athenians hearing of Paul, it is
as impertinent a speech as was ever used by a man of learning* For we dispute
only of Church hearing, and not of what is occasional, and done out of
publick-state, or Church-vvay. Wee never held it unlawful, to hear any man
deliver the Word of God, as the circumstances may be. But what of this: hence
the Treat, will infer, that we may hear any where, and in any way.

If another should have framed such an answer to him, he would have said, that
either he had not learned his Sophistry, or else thought he had to doe with
fools; For he reasoned, ab eo quote est secundum quid ad simpliciter. Makes a
general consequence of that which is true in part.

2. To say, if I approve of the Office simply, because I hear the Officer
preach, then I much more approve of all the Doctrines which he delivers. This
is not so, nor so; For the Office is an institution, by which the Officer hath
power to administer: And howsoever, we have our freedom to like or dislike of
the administrations, as we see just cause for it: Yet by our joining and
communion with them, we certainly approve of the state it self, whether lawful
or unlawful; For Example:

If I come where the Magistrates are sitting, and have civil justice there
administered to me; Albeit by this going of mine to their Court for judgement,
I really approve of the state that they are in: yet J am not therefore
necessitated to approve of all the acts and conclusions they make, but may
dislike them, if I see they are not as they ought to be.

The Corinthians, for ought I can see, resorted unto the Feasts of idols, upon
the same ground that the Treat. lays down for hearing. They went not of
superstition; for they were to well instructed; and Paul in their person brings
forth an excuse for them: 1. Cor. ^. 4. We know that an idol is nothing. As if
they should say, we regard not what they have devised their public falsestate
concerns us not, for we have left it: We are in no Churchcommunion with their
Officers, our meaning is not to worship as they doe, they intend one thing, we
another. But did this satisfy the Apostle? Not in the least; For he knew their
private differing intention, was* but a strong fruit of the flesh, monstrous
presumpt on, and a mere delusion; For their eating was not to be looked upon,
and judged after their secret meaning. But according to that public state where
they were.

And here I desire the Reader to note the difference between Paul and the
Treat. Paul makes the sin of the Corinthians to be their resorting to an
idol-state; Not simply their eating (for tha^ they might have done else-where)
but because it was in, by, or from an institution of the Devil.

The Treat. lays us down a contrary Doctrine, and tells us, a false
Church-state, is nothing: And Antichristian Officer nothing; And that we may
lawfully worship God in the one, and hear his Word preached by the other,
provided we be not in Church-communion with the Officer, andc.

Truly the difference here is great: For the Treat. clears the Corinthians of
the thing for which the Apostle condemns them. But I will not press this
further now; Only what Augustine * said of the learned Fathers, I may speak of
the Treatis. in stead of him, or rather above him, Paul the Apostle comes to my
mind, to him I run, to him I appeal, from all sorts of writers that think
otherwise.

For conclusion, if the false state of a Church and Ministry defile only the
members thereof: And as for other present worshippers, they are blameless: If
this (I say) be a true saying, the^ hath he vainly confined himself to the
Ministry of the Church of England; For his Position will serve as well to
justify hearing among Papists, Arrians, Sorcinians, Jaws, Turks, andc. Yea
further, and to be present at any service or worship they doe.

For what should hinder, but according to this ground, a man may lawfully go to
the Temples of the Saracens, and he are their Priests: considering they doe
deliver many material truths. As that God is true and righteous in all his ways
a: ^ In Alcho ran Azoara. 1.: The Creator of all things b: The giver of every
good gift Azoar. 14. Ad that Iesus Christ is the Son of Mary Azoar. 11., the
Messenger of God, and a true Prophet Azoar. 7..

If any object, but they utter many lies and blasphemies. I answer, the hearing
simply of errors, corrupts not the Hearer: For so he consents not to them in
judgement, not practice, but testifies against them, he delivers his own soul.

SECT. 5.
THE Treatiser lays down our next OBJECTION thus:

By this then it seems, a man may be present at any act of Idolatry, and doe as
others doe, that practice Idolatry, yet not approve of it. And so the three
Nobles in Danial needed not to have put themselves upon such pikes of danger as
they did, for not falling down as others did in the place.

To this he answers: Treat: 1. In preaching of the truths of the Gospel, no
idolatrous act is performed.

Answ. I perceive it is an easy thing to conquest, if begging may procure one
that: But wee are no such children as to give the cause so away.

1. Therefore J say, in preaching of the truths of the Gospel (viz: by a false
Minister, about which is our dispute) an idolatrous act is performed; And that
the Reader may understand this thing the better: He is to consider, that divine
worship is not to be determined by a particular thing (howbeit in it self good)
but as all the essential parts belonging thereto (whether they are persons or
things) are kept and observed.

The Church of Rome in Baptism uses water, and in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, gives bread, and otherwhile wine too; doth this clear their
administrations of idolatry? So runs the Treat: reasoning: But wee cannot
receive it, for the Lord never spake so by him.

J think all men doe think, that Vzziah 2 Chro. 26. 16. committed an idolatrous
act, when he invaded the Priests Office. But what made it so? Took he unlawful
incense? No. Used he strange fire? No. Offered he prohibited sacrifice, or upon
a wrong Altar? No. Where then lay the fault? The Scripture tells us it
pertained not to him to burn incense unto the Lord, but to the Sons of Aaron
Ver. 18. To apply this, if his act were idolatrous, because he wanted a
calling, howbeit observed many truths of the Law; By the same reason, the
Church-acts of Antichristian Ministers, are idolatrous; Yea and as for the
truths which they preach, this clears their acts no more from idolatry; then
Vzziahs true incense and Altar, quited him from transgression.

It is truly said of one Lavaret. in Josh. 22. Home 61. page 7. We ought not to
conclude of an action, that it is good, because it hath in it some thing which
in it self is so.

And this is true, as in divine things, so in humane too: For it is a known
Tenant of Philosophers, Omne totum suis partibus ordinatur, mensuretur and
determinatur. the whole is composed, measured and determined of all the parts.

Unto the constitution of the whole (according to Aristotlec) is required ^.

2. As Iob Iob. 24.4. saith, who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Not
one. The false Office by our Opposit^es is acknowledged to be unclean. Now, to
deny that their Ministerial acts are not from thence, is against common sense.
And this further may be amplified by that passage in the Prophet, Hag. 2. 12
13. See Iunius on the place. where it is showed, that holy things are polluted
by touching things unclean. Arrest. 12. Met. 3, and Lib. de Poet. cap. 7.

3. If in preaching the truth (according to the point in question) no
idolatrous act is performed: Then it will follow, that a man may remain a
Minister of a false Church all his life time: Provided, he only teach Note that
such whom they call Lecturers, in some places only preach, and doe nothing
else: As I my self for some years stood so^. the truths of the Gospel; Our
reason is, for in this, if he doe no idolatrous act, then he sins not, and so
Consequently no just cause of his coming out from among them. The vileness of
which thing, I leave to the Readers censure.

4, By the Treat: assertion, all usurpers of civil Offices can justify
themselves easily; For although they are inrtuders and Tratours: Yet seeing
their administrations are so and so: No Rebellious Act is performed. I could
note here many more such absurdities and inconsequences, tualoga in theology,
as they cal them: but enough is said; Considering the truth brings forth no
error nor absurdity by true consequence. Neither doth one part contradict
another, as Augustine Scripture sancta in nulla part discordat. De verb. doom.
2. and 11. well observes.

Let us hear what he hath further to say: Treat. The Jewes after Christs death,
and the taking away and abolishing of the legal ordinance thereby, circumcised
their infants, and frequented the Temple for purification and other M^saicall
Ceremonies, as parts of Gods Worship, and still remaining of divine
institution. Paul also circumcised Timothy, entered the Temple, and yet did not
approve any manner of way of the error and evil of the Jewish worshippers.

Answ. It is truly said of the Orators, there is nothing done so evil, but with
fair colours a man may defend it. To allege the Legal Ordinances for the
justifying of this Hearing, is a poor shift, and shows a desperate case. For 1.
it is doubtful to some, whether any did well to practice the Mosaicall
Ceremonies after our Lords suffering; I could name not a few, who say, it was
their failing that did so.

But 2. grant (and so I think) that yet the Jewish Rites were tolerable, I say
in respect of the time, of an indifferent nature, and therefore their
observation till further propagation of the Gospel in offensive, and in it self
not evil; And so thinks Calvin Instead. l. 3 c. 19, Sect. 10. Bez^ Annot. in
Act. 21, 27. P. Martyr Loc. Coo^. in Clas. 2, c. 4, page. 200., Zanchy In
praecept. 3, page. 338., the Writers of the Centuries Cent. 1. l. 1^ page.
416., the Rhemists In Act. 21 24.. God minding (saith Augustine Ad Hierom.
Epist. 16.) to have them honourably buried.

Now, what makes this for his purpose: if there be any agreement between this
Example and the thing he stands for, thus it must be: if it were lawful for
Paul and others, to doe a thing which might be either done or not done,
according to circumstances; then it is Lawful to hear false Ministers, howbeit
the practice be against the Word of God. I shall need say little more, for if
his best friends will but draw the curtain and look on both parts with a single
and impratiall eye, they must without more ado, confess that I have rightly
applied it, or they themselves applied to it, what we say commonly, non causam
pro causa; he takes that for defence of his cause, which makes nought to the
purpose.

3. To speak a little further in this thing, (because some of our Opposites
conceive it is much for them:) I desire these few particulars may be
considered: 1. The Ceremonies whereof we speak, had a necessary use of avoiding
scandal Act. 15, 28. 2. They were expedient for drawing of people unto the
faith and order of the Gospel 1 Cor. 6, 20, 22.: 3. Of Gods own institution at
first. 4. No part of worship. 5. During a time after Christs resurrection in
their nature indifferent Rome: 14 16, Gal. 6 15.. 6. In the use of them it was
not a holding of conformity with idolaters in their Ceremonies.

Contrary to this is the Hearing in question. For it gives offence to Brethren,
hinders many from entering into Church-estate; it hath no other ground but mans
invention, it is a special part of divine worship, in it self a practice sinful
and unlawful, and makes the observers like idolaters in their idolatrous
actions.

That which next follows, is his Wooden Reason of a Cross. I will sert down his
own words.

To come nearer home, Treat: it is the custom in Popish Countries, that all
that pass by a Cross, must in honour of it leave it on the right hand, as they
may doe, by reason of the placing of it, coming or going. D. Rainold against
Hart. c: 1, divis: 2, page: 46 Now, if I ride with others that way, I may doe
the thing that they doe, and keep Company with them, and yet not honour the
Cross.

Answ. It was a common practice (as a wise and learned man observes) among
young Students, in the time of the Dunces, that if in disputation they were
brought to an inconvenience, were it never so absurd: they would have a
distinction, though without brain or sense.

I will not say, that the Trea. distinction here is senseless, but this I say
(and will make it good) it is truthlesse, besides hurtful and dangerous.

For to take the things as he lays it down; that is, there are two ways to pass
by a Cross, and I know there are in company some, who in honour of the idol,
will leave it on the right hand; Now in this case, if I should silently pass on
that side with them, I should offend, yea though I did it, for no other cause,
but to keep on with my company.

My reasons for it are these: 1. The practising of an indifferent thing,
wherein others superstitiously put holiness and necessity, is an occasion of
confirming and hardening of them in their superstition. Of this judgement were
the German Churches in the Confession of Auspnrg Harm. Confess. page. 222., and
Musculus Loc. Com. page. 422., Chyereus In Mat. p. 342, 343., Bucanus Loc.
page. 353. and 332., B. Jewel Defen. of Apol. p. 386., D. Whitaker Descript.
page. 483., and others.

2. Gods Word charge us to avoid all appearance of evil, and condemns all such,
as with their bodies, and in outward show Levit. 18. 34. and 19. 19 Exo. 23.
24., give any appearance to idolaters, of conforming themselves to them in
their idolatrous actions; howsoever they doe it not with the same mind and
intent that the others doe. And this is affirmed by Bucer Com. in Mat. c. 18.
foal. 143. 6., Polanus In Ezech. c. 16., Calvin In Levit. 19. page. 207., B.
Hooper Upon Ionise: Sermon. 6. foal. 146., and others.

3. Deu. 14. 1. and 12. 4. 30. 31. Ge^. 35. 5. I must please my neighbour to
edification Rome. 15. 2. 1 Cor. 8. 33.. Now mark it, if I yield him not due
help in fit time and place, whereby to with-hold him from sin, I become
accessory to the evil he doth, So write The^philact Com. in Rome. 15., D. Ames
De conscien. l. 5. c. 10. p. 282. and others.

4. Here the Proverb is fulfilled, Silence is consent, For not only by words,
works and Examples, may a man become partaker of another sin; Verum etiam
silentio, and dissimulation vel conniventia, communionem possimus habere cum
aliorum peccatis, saith D. Ames in the fore-named place.

Another Danaeus Comment. in 1 Tim. c. 5. ver. 22. p. 339. thus: Agents and
consentientes pari pain puniuntur, queen cum furibus pro furs habentur apud
Deum.

5. If that passage in Calvin Instead. l. 3. c. 19. Sect. 11. be true, they
give offence who doe any thing unseasonably, rashly, and out of order and
place, unto the hurt of others: then is not this thing void of scandal.

6. Dissimulation is a kind of denial of Christ. So saith Zanchy Praecept. 3.
page. 554. Tom. 4. And Equines Equine. 2. 2. quaest. 3. art. 1. calls it
mendacium in facts. And that this is dissimulation: the description of that
vice will make it evident. For according to Davena^ Determ. quaect. 7. page.
40. that is dissembling, cum aliquis per sign factorum contrarium eius
significat quote in mente clausum habit. And these reasons may bee applied
against the going with others to an idol-ministerie, Church, Worship, andc, as
here unto a Cross.

The Treat. goes foreword thus: If I have just and reasonable cause of coming
or standing before the Magistrate (to whom I owe civil honour) while he is
performing some act of idolatry, in the streets or else where; I may upon the
same ground, go or stand uncovered by him, without just blame.

Answ. I may say (as another said D. Fulk. Confute. Them. on Philip. 2. 10. in
a like case) with such respects, relations, and distinctions, all idolatry and
will-worship may be defended.

It greeves me truly, to see his fearful retiring into the battered works of
the Familists: for howsoever he minseth it, and would make his thread somewhat
fairer; notwithstanding their web and warp is one: for let the doctrine of the
Familists be perused, and it will appear, it is all one here with the
Treatisers. Men (say they See a Book set forth by Edmond Iessop. against
Anabapt.) upon occasion may be bodily present where idolatry is practised; yet
so, as they loath the same, and keep their hearts to God only. So they

What they (by Occasion) do mean, and he by a just and reasonable cause, I know
not, neither doe I much desire to know; but this I know, there can be no reason
given, that a man should come where idolatry is practised, (be the Magistrate
present) and there in any outward signs and gestures doe as the rest, secretly
proposing to himself, not to give any honour to the false worship, but to the
Magistrate, to whom he owes civil worship.

If Namaan had been of the Treat. judgement, he would not have questioned the
lawfulness of going with his moister into the House of Rinnon: For he had as
just and reasonable a cause, as the Treat. I think could instance. Moreover, he
meant only in applying himself in civil service to the King, and had renounced
before all superstitions of the Heathens, so that he would not bow in respect
of the idol, for he detested it with his heart: Notwithstanding all this, to go
thither, he could not lawfully doe, I say upon no terms was it lawful for him,
to doe any civil reverence and honour to the Magistrate* while he was
performing acts of idolatry. And so, say Calvin In 2. King. 5., Martyr Loc.
Co^. p. 199. and 643., Sedelius Comme^t. in 2. King. 5., Bidembachius Id.,
Zanchy Pries. 3. p. 536., Musculus In a dial. translated out of French into
English, Virel Ground Rel. l. 2. p. 103., and others.

We are to serve God in the sight of the world, and what wee think in our
hearts, that should bee written (as it were) and seen in our foreheads. But
many now a days, make no conscience of dissembling in Religion, so it be for
some worldly advantage; as that Iewd fellow professes in the Poet Teren. in
Phorm. Act. 3. Scen. 2., Non pudet vanitatis, minim, dum ad rem.

But such as desire to walk (^ Gal. 2. 13.) with a right foot, cannot endure
it. Policarpus Euseb. l. 4. c. 15. might have saved his life if hee would have
dissembled before the Magistrate, but he saw it would have been an appearance
of evil, and a discouragement to the brethren, and therefore spake boldly,
Christianus sum.

Sozemon Hist. l. 5. reports that Iulian the Apostate calling all his soldiers
before him, gave to every one a grain of incense to cast into the fire, and a
peace of gould; they that were christians, having also received each man his
incense and gould; not understanding at the first that he was performing any
act of idolatry, but that the rite tended either to his own per^onall dignity,
or to make some sweet perfume; but hearing-afterwards that this perfume was
made unto the idols, they returned every one with his gould again, gave it to
him, deplored their oversight, though in so doing they endangered themselves of
martyrdom.

The protestant princes of Augusta, in the days of Charles 5. could not bee won
either by fair means of foul to stand by the Emperor uncovered while he was
performing some acts of idolatry: For if they would have done so, there
estates, honour, liberty, andc. would have been granted to them.

I could produce the examples of many others, who rather then they would come
and stand by the magistrate whilst he was performing some act of idolatry and
there bow the knee, or vnc^ver the head and suffer both their krees and head to
be cut of; and good reason too: for such a practice, is the high of delusion
and deph of dissimulation: and as one Calf hill on the Cross, foal. 185. truly
saith howsoever men flatter themselves with a hidden opinion yet the evident
and apparent work of capping bowing and kneeling, shows that the heart is
unsound, and the door a mere idolater. Blessed is he therefore, that condemns
not himself in the thing he approves.

In conclusion he saith: To apply these things to the Objection moved, Treat:
seeing no other cause could reasonably be conceived of the Kings commanding
such a thing, or of their doing the thing at his commandment, save the
worshipping of the idol, in so doing they could not have escaped the just
plaime of idolatry: But now I have just cause more then one of my hearing, and
amongst the rest mine edification; and therefore cannot be challenged therein,
to appr^of the ministers state, or standing, beside that, as I formerly
answered here is none idolatrous act performed.

Answ. 1. Thine own mouth (saith Eliphaz in Iob Chap. 15, 6. condemns thee, and
not I: Yea thine own lips testify against thee. His application here, is indeed
against himself: For If the 3: Nobles in Daniell, had committed idolatry in
falling down before the idol^ (yea howsoever they had not intended to honour
it) because it was the known and public intent of the setting up of it, to be
adored, and the Kings commandment was that it should be so: This being so, then
it follows, that seeing false churches and false ministers are real idols, set
up by earthly Princes; and their known intent by public proclimation is, that
all people within their dominions should come to them, bow before them, and by
outward gestures approve of them: This I say being so, the conclusion is (certo
certius) not liable to exception, that whosoever comes, and bows before those
idols, cannot e^cape the just blame of idolatry, howsoever in himself, hee
intends no such thing.

And here let it bee observed (what wee even now said) if a man perform an
action in a state, and of public nature, he is to be considered (in respect of
himself) as is that state, and according to the public ordinances: For If the
state, bee false, and the officer unlawful, it is familisme for him to say, I
know this state, is set up against the Lord Iesus Christ, and every commer here
to worship, according to the constitution, is an idolater: but I will have in
my self asecret meaning from the rest, and in this regard, I cannot be
accounted an approver of the state, or that I doe any worship here, as the same
is publicly established and intended it should be don.

The learned condenme this, and stile it gross dissimulation, and a mocking of
God. So Scarpius, Symphom proph. page. 238. Caelius, A little Treat: to all
faithful Christ. Hemingius, In Ephe. c. 5. Rivetus, In Psa. 16 p. 53, 54.
Zanchy, in Comt; 3, p. 534; Mr. Philpot, Act. mon. page; 2002; yea the thing is
so vile, as a Papist Called the love of the ^oule; hath written against it, a
whole treatise.

The authors of Pirth assembly write thus: Wheresoever the public intent of a
Kirk is to worship the sacrament, every private man following that intent, is
formally an idolater: if his private intent be diverse from the public, yet he
is still materially and interpretative an idolater.

What they say, wee say: and hear lies the difference between our opposites and
us. Wee both, grant the public intent of a false Church, is, to have their
State, Worship, and Government, approved, x Page. 49* But here is the odds;
they say, seeing their private intention, is diverse from the public, they are
not trespassers with the public: though in public they doe the same action. We
on the contrary affirm, seeing the public intent of the Church, is to honour
the idol, every private man following that intent is formably an idolater: if
his private intent be diverse from the public, yet he is still materially and
interpretative an idolater.

Ismenias (as the same authors note) stopping down before the king of Persia,
Ibid. to take up a ring, which hee of purpose let fall; was not excused,
because this stopping in common use, was the adoring of the Kings of Persia:
Let the godly reader consider of it, take advise, and speak his mind.

2. J deny, that any man hath just cause to hear (in the way wee speak of) for
his edification. For what he saith here, he produces neither scripture nor
reason, nor any authority but his own; as if his ipse dixit, like the popes
sentence were penitus definitive, absolate definitive and to be rested in: but
to use his own words Iustificat. separate. page. 47. 48. seeing he soevveth
himself barren of Divine authority. I will proof what I doe deny by these
reasons.

1 Whatsoever Christ hath thought fit to teach his Church and the instruments
and helps whereby, that hath hee fully set down in his word 2 Timot. 3 16* 17.
Act. 20. 27. Ioh. 20. 30. 31. 2 Pet. 1. 3.: so that to acknowledge any other
means of edification, then such as he hath appointed, is to receive another
Teacher into the Church besides him, and to confess some in perfection in those
means which he hath ordained for our edification; this argument is brought
against the vain traditions of Rome and England by Gualter ^n Hobos. foal.
270., Lavater in 1. Chron. 10. 11., V^sinus Catech. par. 3. p. 758. 760.,
Polanus Partied. Theol. page. 83 191*, Ames ^, the authors of the Abrigement ^,
and it holds every way as firm and good in our dispute.

P. Martyr speaks ^ home to this point. For as much as God* is most wise, he
needs not our devise for instruments to stir up faith in vs, which thing no
tradesma^ in this kind would endure; but would choose to himself at his own
pleasure wha^ hee should think most fit, andc. How bold are these ^ who w^ll
P^aescribe to God after What manner and by ^ shall edify ^s. So hee.

2 Seeing our discourse ^ edification, which Christ the only Teacher of his
Church hath appointed, then is it is set down, by the appostle in Ephes: 4. 11.
12. 13. the reason is, because Paul there mentioned all ministerial means for
the perfect and complete building of the Church from the first to the last: so
write, Fenner Sacr. Theol. c. 7, p. 119., Laiton Syons p. 10., Piscator
Aphorism. loc. 20., Cartwright Repl. 1. to Whitg. p. 85., Bozo in Ephes. 4,
10., Calvin instead. l 4 c. 1. Sect. 5, Polanus Syntag. l. 10, and 11., and
others.

But ^ think our Opposites will not say, that Paul there intends this Hearing,
as a means of our edification: If they should, l the Treat: would be against
them, for hee confesses it is not any particular ordinance left vs by Christ.
Ergo. andc.

3. As Augustine saith More fame, qua^ idolothytis vesci. de bono congug. c.
16. it is better to die with famine, then to eat with Idolothites, Daniell
chose rather to live upon pulse, then to be fed, with the most delicate meats
from the kings table, seeing they were such meat as he ought not to eat. For he
knew (as one Osiand. in Dan. 1. p. 367. writes on the place) Not by the power
of the meat, but by Gods divine blessing, is the body preserved: To apply this,
seeing the Hearing stood for, p Page. 37. is a spiritual eating with idolaters:
and men cannot receive the food without pollution; Our best course, is to
co^tent our selves with what means of edification, we find in Gods way, be it
much or little, I say not despise Zach. 4. 10. the day of small things: and the
rather, considering, that it is not the means, but Gods blessing on the means,
that edefieth vs.

4: VVhosoever takes to himself, a practice, which is not grounded on Gods
word, and therein is strict, he is just overmuch D. Gouge on Ephes. 6, 14. and
presumes bove that which is written: and this is their case who hear unlawful
ministers for edification.

5. It is not true, that a man being out of the false Church, and a visible
member of a true, should bee furthered in the way grace, by returning thither
to hear the word. Vpo^ better ground I may say, his grouth in knowledge and
sincerity hereby will be hindered, and probably he in time drawn back to his
former vomit; or if he escape ship-wrack this way, Treat. 2. par. 4, p. 78. yet
to meet with such heavy terrors of conscience, as that his time after will be
spent with grief, and his years with sighing.

And here (christian reader) I think fit; to make known unto thee, Cartvv.
Home. in Eccles. 7, foal. 149. what happened about 7 years past in England,
there was a gentle man of warick sheir, by name Mr Edward Grefwold, aman very
religious, as many besides my self can testify: He and I, being bosom Friends
(or to use his own common saying o^hearts being as Davits and Ionathans, knitt
together) upon just cause, wee both left the parish assemblies. He afterword by
the means of some crafty men, was persuaded unto hearing again: upon this he
fell into great troble of spirit, and could have no feeling assurance of any
peace with God: remaining thus awhile, at length he sent a letter by his
servant unto me (the which I have kept a long time by me) in this letter he
largely acknowledges his offence, and among other passages writes thus: You, ah
you are happy: but I by my fall am miserable and wretched: and for the present
time, I feel my soul to bee no otherwise, then if it were in hell: andc, ever
since I went to their Assemblies I have observed the Lords hand against me:
andc, wherefore I beseech you by the mercices of God, set a day apart for me,
and seek the almighty by fasting and praying, that the waterflood over flow me
not: andc. what his refreshings were after this, J cannot say, the report is,
that to his changing, he had sad and sorrowful days: notwithstanding I am
confident, that his soul is with Christ in paradise. As I am writing this, I
think of the words in the Prophet Psal. 119 120. My flesh trembles for fear of
thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments. He that is wise will consider of these
things: For as one Hal. antiq. Rome. l. 11. saith providing before is better
then repenting afterword.

It is no marvel that false churches by some are called Officina scelerum, and
carnificina sanctorum, shops of wickedness, and chambles of the saints; for
what can a tender conscience expect in frequenting them, but indeed, pricks,
racks, and tortures. Aquila and Symmachus for the Hebrew Aven, which signifies
the false state under Jeroboam, render it in Greek ^, an unprofitable house:
and well they might for whosoever goes to such houses, he may be sure he shall
lose by it. And this is the judgment of Botsach Prompt. allege. c. 21, de
minist., Lutz In Eva^g; Doom. 8, post pent. p 339., Polanus In Ezech. 44* page.
800., Pelargus d, and others. And whereas some put difference between the
Preachers there; as one saith e the best are the worst: a Quaest. Evang in Mat.
23. Motives to the king and state, Page. 32. For these as evil workers,
secretly, and by degrees, and with as little noise as may bee, seek to keep
people in error and disorder.

3. The consequence of his (therefore) conclusion, no logician can make it
good: For he argues just for all the world, as if one go school challenged
therein, Judge Justice moister go on thus a tribus ad centum, for there is no
end of such absurdities; the very naming whereof, is answer enought.

But to the point, the Treat here yields the cause; For if a man shall hear in
a false church for edification; therein he approves directly of the state, For
this is a sure thing (and let it be noted) no administration performed in a
state, and by a power and constituted office, can bee sought, There are maine
difference between a mans bare presence in a co^stituted stat^; as being there,
unavvares, unvvillingly, or by compulsion; and presence there of purpose to
partake of the admistrations. desired and received, but in so doing, the doer
(Ipso facto) really approves of that state, power, and office be the same
lawful or unlawful. And as for any mans saying to the contrary, it is sine
capite fabula, a vision of his own head, and will prove as good as the miracles
which Iamnes and Iambres wrought, even means to harden his own heart and some
others, as they did Pharoahs by doing them.

Lastly where as hee tells vs, Hee hath formerly said here is no idolatrous act
performed, in stead of this twice sodden Coleworth, I looked hee should have
alleged some Scriptures from whence this might have been gathered, or concluded
at the least, or brought some convincing argument, which might have cleared it,
or if none of those, yet that he would have showed some authority or author,
which had so written or spoken; but here is deep silence; and we must take all
(pro confesso,) upon his bare word; but by his leave, wee purpose to try his
novelties, and not take them upon trust.

And howsoever I have said enought before in confutation of this, yet I will
add a word more, and the rather, because not only is this a main point between
vs, but also here is a ground laid, for gross idolaters, to justify their evils
by: For If in preaching of the truths of the Gospel in a false Church (say by a
Pope, a Cardinal, an Arch-bishop, a Lord-Bishop, or any other enemy of God) no
idolatry be done, then may a ma^ worship God in a way of his own devising
blameless. We have hitherto been instructed, that unto divine worship two
things are required, matter and manner, First it must be a true matter of
worship, grounded on the word: Secondly done in aright and lawful manner,
order, form, way, andc. and if either of those be wanting, it cannot be a
reasonable service; and of this judgement were Perkins, Jdolat. last times, p.
674. 675. last volume. Brinsley, True watch, p 28. Elton On Colos. p. 308.,
Dod, On the co^mand. 2. Hieron, On Psa. 51, page. 4. Bates, His book against
Ceremonies, p. 191. Trailor, On Tit. c. 3. v. 10. p. 715. and others. But
according to the Treat: teaching the later here, is (etrivio) of no use at all;
for so a man preach the truths of the Gospel he doth no Idolatrous act;
although in the mean time he exercise an antichristian office; hence this must
follow: viz, so the truth be preached it is no matter whether the preacher bee
sent from Antichrist, or from Christ; nor whether he preach at Dan and Bethell,
or at Jerusalem in the temple. For if the former committ no idolatrous act, hee
is then as blamles in his way, as the latter is in his. Better the Treat, had
spared his words, and looked better to his answer, or eat them both, then to
blott paper, and abuse the reader with such unsound and hurtfall assertions.

SECT. 6.
Our. 4. Objection is laid down for vs thus: Hee that hears them preach, hears
them as ministers of the Church of England, and as sent by the Bishops, and so
in hearing them hears and receives them that sent them: according to that of
our Saviour hee that hears you, hears me, and hee that despises you, despises
me, and hee that despises me despises him that sent me.

It was some addition to Davits 1 Sam 17* 51. victory over the Philistime, that
he slew him with his own sword. The ta^ke is very easy, to co^fute all that the
Treat: here writes against vs, by the engine of his own acknowledgements: For
to say the truth, Howsoever hee frames Objections for vs, yet originally they
are his own, and even word for word published by himself in former books to the
world: so that Obliquus cursus forgetting (as it were) What he had before held
and written, he makes himself in this controversy his own greatest opposite.

Th^t this Objection can call no man Father, so properly as the Treat; It is
certain; for to my knowledge no man but himself hath used it: Indeed he hath
done it, and applied i^to the same purpose, that he brings it here for us, that
is, against the Hearing of unlawful Ministers. His words are these Manumiss: to
a Manuduct. page: 9..

If it belong to the chief Prelates to call Ministers, and that in calling
them, they give them power and authority (though no absolute charge) to preach
according to the order of that Church; Then follows it undeniably, that those
Ministers thus preaching doo therein exercise the Prelates power: And that it
may be said of the Ministers, and Bishops, as Christ said of his Disciples and
himself, that whosoever receives them that are sent, receives them that sent
them. In submitting unto, or withdrawing from him that is sent by the King in a
work of his Office, men doe submit unto, or with-draw from the King himself,
and his authority; So it is in all estates and subordinations whether
Ecclesiastical or Civil; as every one that is not dim in himself, may see by
the light of nature. So writes the Treat: Now let us see how he confutes
himself.

I grant the former part of the Objection, Treat: and account the denying of it
a point of Familisme, seeing the Officers of public states in the executing of
their offices, are to be esteemed according to the public Laws and Orders of
those states, and not according to any under hand course or intention either by
themselves or others.

Answ. A man that goes with a veil before his eyes; comes now and then into his
way, although he know it not. The Treat. in this walk about Hearing in false
Churches, is sometimes cut, otherwhile in, he says and unsays; But so far as he
speaks the truth, he speaks it against himself: for his answer here, it is
nothing but a yielding the case, in some compass and circumlocution of words;
and that the Reader may perceive it is so, I will make it obvious and clear to
him by an argument or two; and first thus:

If to hear Antichristian Ministers, be to serve God in, and by an ordinance,
way, or institution, devised by idolaters, and with idolaters; Then is it
unlawful.

But the first is true, therefore the second.

The proposition is undeniable by the Treat. own confession: For he grants that
^ course of hearing is no ordinance left us by Christ: Then ^ it must be from
Antichrist: Again he professes* they ^ as they preach, and preach as Ministers
of the ^ according to the public ^ is, to speak ^ form religious worship to
God, in, and by a public ordinance, way and state which idolaters have
invented, and with idolaters.

This I say (aperto pectore) he grants to the full: And no marvel, for to deny
it, were an audacious fiction, monstrous unparalleled presumption* and would
mark a man out, for an Athesticall Familist, as perspicuous as the leprosy of
Vzziah, which brake forth in his forehead.

The Assumption is as manifest; For 1. by the Scriptures Deu. 12. 30. Levit,
18. 3. Exo. 23. 24. Levit. 9, 27. 28. Deu. 14. 1 Levit. 19. 17. Gen. 35. 2. 3.
Esa, 27. 9. wee are prohibited from all conformity with idolaters in any of
their ways, order, and manner of worship, and Religious Observations. It was
the custom Herodot. in Thalia: Becan. in analog. vet. and nov. Test. c. 15. of
the Arabians and other Heathens, in imitation of Dyonisius, that is Bacchus, to
round the corners of their head; Now this the Israelites might not doe Levit.
19. 27. (though in it self an indifferent thing Calvin. in Levit. 19. 17.)
because God would not have them to bee like idolaters.

This also may be further proved by the testimony of learned men; For to have
any thing common with idolaters, or to serve God after any way of theirs; Or to
take up, and make use of any of their rites, orders, observations, institutions
for to worship God in, or by them: they hold to be unlawful. Yea howbeit a man
be not in Ecclesiastical union with them. Thus have the old Fathers affirmed
Tertull: de Coron. Milit. Greg. lib. 1. Epist. 44. ad Leon. Theod* l. 1. c. 10.
August. Epist. 86. ad Casul.; So our later writers: Calvinists Porous in 1 Cor.
10* 14. Bucer in Mat. 18. foal. 143. Bozo Tract. Theol. vol. 3. page. 210.,
Lutherans Cent. 4. c. 13 col. 406. Chemn^t. Exam. Theol. Melanct. par. 2. page.
491., formal Protestants B. Jewel upon 1. These. 5. p. 219. Sulclief. Chal.
page. 62. in England, Reformists Perth. assemb. p. 55. 56. Alt. Damas. p. 539.
Papists Bellar. de Monach. c. 40. and de effect. sacr. l. 2. c. 31. Sect. 10.
Rhemist. annot. on 1. Cor. 6. 14. and 1. Timot. 6. Sect. 4. in Apoc. 1. 10.,
and Schoolmen Equine. 1. 2a. q. 102. Art. 6. c. 6. m., yea many Iew-Doctors See
Mr. Ainsworth in Levit. 19. 27., some Councils Toledo Can. 5. and 40. Loot. c.
38. Brac. Can. 32. and 73., have thus concluded, and the Cannon-Law Deer. Par.
2. Cause. 26. quaest. 7. c. 13. andc. 14. andc. 17. speaks so too.

And here I desire the Reader to observe, that were the grounds true which he
lays down for hearing: to wit, that there is no Religious Communion between the
persons preaching and hearing; They cannot be challenged to approve of the
Ministers state or standing: They have no communion with the office of the
Ministry, andc. I say, were these things so, (which are not) yet would this
practice be found sinful; because (as we have before showed) herein men worship
God in, or by a way and means, which idolaters have instituted.

Our second argument is taken from the Treat. words following, which are these:
Treat. I profess I hear them, as Ministers of the Bb. sending, and of the
Parishes sent ^. Hence I argue thus:

He that hears the Ministers of the Bb. sending, and of the Parishes sent too:
hee hears (in the sense of the Scriptures) false Prophets: But it is not lawful
to hear false Prophets:

Therefore it is not lawful to hear the Ministers of the Bb* sending, or of the
Parishes sent too.

The Major is proved clearly in the defence of our 12. Objection. The Minor is
certain by these reasons.

1. The hearing of false Prophets is forbidden in the Word of God Ex. 20. 5.
Pro. 5. 8. Mat. 7 15. Philip. 3. 2. 1. Timot. 5. 22.. 2. The practice of it is
will-worshipp Joh. 4. 23. Rome. 12. 1. 2. Mat. 15. 9* Col. 2. 23; the which is
unacceptable to God. 3. It is to rebel against the Lord, and to seek what is in
man, to uphold that thing which the Lord will cast down and consume. Number.
16. 2 These. 2. 10. 11. Rev. 18. 1. 2. 1 Sam. 15. 22. 4. This is to embrace the
bosom of a stranger, and so to co^mitt spiritual whoredom against the Lord Pro.
5. 20. Psal. 106. 39.. 5. It defiles the name of God Ezech. 43. 7. 8.. 6. This
is to hold conformity with idolaters, and to be like them; The which thing
ought not to be Levit. 18. 3. and 19. 19. 27. 28. Exo. 23. 24. Deu. 12. 30.
32.. 7. It shows that a man is not one of Christ sheep, but carnal and
unconverted Ioh. 10. 4. Esa. 30. 22, and 27. 9.. 8. It manifests great want of
the love and zeal of God 2 King. 23. 4. Rev. 2. 3. 4. Psal. 119. 128. Ioh. 2.
16.. 9. It is to serve Satan and Anti-Christ; as it is written: His servants ye
are whom ye obey 2 Chro. 11, 14. Rev. 9. 20..

10. It defiles the soul Eze. 20* 7 Lastly, the doer hereby is exposed, to the
wrath of God Re. 144. 2. These. 2. 8, 10..

Thus the Treat: like the Bee is drowned in his own Honey; And truly pity it
is, but all pleaders for Baal were always thus entangled in their own words,
Rev. 14* 9 Eze. 16. 54. according to that in Ovid.

Non est lex iustior ulla
Quam necis artifices art peri^e sua.
The Treat. Lib. 2. de art amand. speaks on thus: But not as my Ministers,
either sending, Treat: or sent to, except I be of those Parishes, or at least
in Ecclesiastical Union with them.

Answ. A man bent to declining, is glad of every colour which he may pretend to
justify him^el^e in declining; It is a poor distinction, which he use^h here to
decline the point in question: For 1. what use was there to tell us, He bears
them not as his Ministers; This well might have been spared, and something
said, to warrant by Scripture the hearing of them at all. If a woman be accused
of adultery, and to excuse her self, shall suy: The adulterer is in no covenant
or band with me. Is this enought to clear her? No. I have proved before, that
all religious performances in false Churches, are idolatrous actions; Now then
to worship God there, and for excuse to say, we are not in Ecclesiastical union
with the state or Ministry; I may well say ( lingo quo vadit) it is idly
spoken; and much like the Friars plea, we are exempted Lord.

Again, for his distinction, it is the same which Papists, and others allege,
to justify there idol-Ceremonies; They say, how soever these are things, which
Ievves and Pagans did be ore them, yet their end and respect in doing them, is
different. What is said of some, in answer thereunto, I may here say the like:
To practice that thing in Gods worship, which neither directly nor consequently
is included in the word, is an open breach of Gods Law, bee the doers meaning
this or that.

What jealous or wife husband, if his wife should receive some love-tokens fro^
a known adulterer and one that goes about to undermine her honesty; would take
it for a sufficient excuse, if she should say, I receive indeed such things
from a known adulterer, and as he is an adulterer, but not wine andc. The
weight of the Treat: distinction, lies between meum and tuum; Hee pro^esseth to
reciue love-guifts from spiritual adulterers and as they are so, but not his.

Now I marvel how his pen could drop such poison, and he not smell the stink of
it When he wrote it. I wish all men in all places, to take heed, that they
deceive not their own souls by such foolish distinctions: for if such things
will not stand before sor-ry-man: how then before the great God, Who is a
jealous husband, and a consuming fire.

Now let vs hear what follows in the Treat: Treat. By hearing and receiving
there, Christ means properly the hearkening too, believing and obeying the
doctrine taught by the Apostles, which many despised, unto whom he opposes the
former that heard it.

Answ: He that co^es to the field without his weapon it is an argument, he
means to save himself by flying, and not by fighting. Whether the Treat: had on
any armour to fight with against this objection. I will not determine, but this
I say (and will abide by it) he flies away from the point, and speaks nothing
either for it, or against it: For 1. Were his distinction granted, between
hearing them as BB: Ministers, and not as his. And again that by receiving the
Apostles, Christ means properly hearking to, and obeying their doctrines. I say
suppose this (but I grant it not) yet doth not this take a way the weight of
our reason, nor in truth so much as touch it.

I shall expect that he who comes nix to the field, in the behalf of
Antichristian Ministers, doe prepare a better Answer to this objection. And
that he may know, what he hath to confute, I will a little enlarge the point.

1. The Treat. in applying hearing and receiving to the doctrines of the
Apostles, doth not well; For the first only respects their teaching, the latter
their persons; This is evident in the Text Mat. 10. 14. whosoever shall not
receive you, and hea^e my words andc. Implying that Christ is two ways
received, in the ministry of the Gospel; viz. In the person of the Teacher, and
in the doctrines taught by him. And thus doe out best Expositers understand the
place. Calvine, Porous, Piscator, Aretius, Musculus.

It is further to be noted, where Christ sayh* he that receives you, receives
me andc. His meaning is that such as hearken to, and obey the doctrines of his
Ministers, therein doe acknowledge his authority, power and kingly office over
his Church, to appoint her laws, I mean in a work of their ^ffice. offices,
ordinances; andc. and also the fathers donation or the delivering up of the
same into his sons hand.

To apply this; As they who hearken unto Christs ministers; doe therein approve
of his lawful power over his Church, and of the fathers gift this way to him;
so contrariwise, such as hearken * to Antichrists Ministers, doe therein
approve of Antichrists unlawful power over the false Church, and the devils
Satan is the author of false ministries in the apostasy of the man of sin.
donation; or his putting of that power into his eldest sons hands. If any say
we intend not so, I answer (Res ipsa aliud ostendit) the actio^ which they do
is so. quid verb audiam cum fact videam. And here that saying of a learned (a)
man is fulfulled: There are some* which deny that they worship Idols, T. C.
Repl 1. p. 88. and 204. when in the mean time their own doings charge them with
it: Now there are too many in those days grossly guilty this way.

His next words are, Lavat. in Iosh. 22. Home. 61. Treat. The Ministers in the
Parishes, have not the doctrines of the Gospel from the Bishops as they have
their offices, but from God in his word.

Answ. It was a law Eugene. Boron. Jure consult. l. 1. p. 120. among the
Romans, that whosoever passed not into their City at the gates, but attempted
to break throw the walls, or to climb over them, should be put to death. The
Treat. in pressing the hearing of the truths of the Gospel, would persuade us,
so we do receive them, it is no matter whether it be by order or disorder,
whether from the Ministers; of Christ or Antichrist. Whether in a true Church,
or in a false. But this counsel we cannot take, because to our knowledge, there
is a divine statute in force against it: and therefore as we must T. C. Repl.
1. p 155. care for the truth, so must we care of whom we have it: and he gives
this reason. Ibid. p. 83. As God hath ordained that the truth should be
preached, so also hath he ordained in what order, and by whom it should be
preached. We may not therefore adventure Penry Exhort. to the govern. of Wales
page. 46. to go unto him for those, things, which he hath no commission to
deliver.

Suppose Carah or some other in that Conspiracy, should have said thus: Come to
us ye men of Israel, and hearken to; believe and Obey the truths taught in our
Tents. If you object that our Calling is anti-Mosaicall and false: we answer,
this cannot be any bar or let in the thing, seeing the doctrines we teach are
from God in his law.

J cannot see according to the Treat. arguing, how in such a case they could
have staid without: for if we may go into the Sinagogues of Antichrist; so the
Doctrines of the Gospel be there preached? I would know then of our Opposites,
why an Israelite upon the same ground (viz. to hear the Doctrines of the law)
might not have gon with them rebels into their Tents. I believe if we come to
open terms, these will be found to be par pari things alike, and the one as
lawful as the other, and both stark nought.

But to come more nearer to the point, the thing which the Treat, harps most
upon, is, that they teach the truth: And our opposites use this as their
special and main position viz. Where the truth is taught, there they may
lawfully hear. To discover their follow herein. J pray let it be minded what
was said before, As the hearing in question, is a religious action, so to have
it lawful and good, the circumstances pertaining to it, must necessarily be
observed, of which circumstances the truth taught, is only one particular. It
is a received maxim both in divinity and Philosophy, that circumstances make
actions formally good or bad, so write Junius De pol., Equines 1a. 2a. q. 8.
Art: 3*, Camerius Praelect* Tom. 2. p. 49., and Burgess of the lawfulness of
kneeling C. 1. confesses they are intrinsical and essential to actions, and
especially making up there nature. Fed: Morellus upon these words of Seneca, k
Scho. 2. Lib. referred quid, cui, quando, quare, saith that without these
circumstances of things, persons, time, place andc. facti ratio non constat.
Friar Ambrosius Caturinus Counc. l. 2 p. 224. following the doctrine of Thomas,
meanteyneth in the covnsell of Trent, that to do a-good work the concurrence of
all circumstances is necessary.

What these circu^stances or parts are, is showed in that old verse. vitium
rei, yet in it there is vitium perfo^ae, loci, ordinis, relationis, andc as
the. Tr^. in aletter to D. Ames published in Brownists schis. phraseth it else
where.

1. The Person designed is not lawfully called: now a false Office and a true
worship (are ^) they are no way compatible. 2. As it respects the place, (that
is the Idoll-Churchstate) so it is to worship God there, where he hath
forbidden men to worship him. 3. For the instruments and means, in this men
make themselves beholding to Antichrist, for his order, constitution, manner
and way to serve God in, and by. Now fie for shame, that any should be so base,
as to scrape acquentance with that Babylonian whore, who is the greatest enemy
that the Lord hath upon the earth. I^ is a most certain ^igne (saith one Estque
merae proditionis certissimum indicium si quis alique^ ex suis, videoed,
concilia cla^ cum host captantem aut in eius aurem insu^ure ante^. of a very
traitor, when a man shall see one of his own, take secret counsel with his
enemy, and whisper him in the ear.

Touching the other circumstances: viz. why, how, when: these all are also here
wanting, as I could instance in sundry particulars, if need were. But to wind
up all, and bring all the former into some fewer heads. the goodness or badness
of divine worship, is to be considered either in actu signato and quo ad
specium: or in actu exercito and quo ad individium. Divine worship is said to
be speciated by its object, and individuated, by its circumstances: when divine
worship is good or evil, in respect. of the object of it. we say it is good or
evil, quo ad speciem. when in respect of the circumstances, we term it good or
evil quo ad invidium. Cartewr. kissed. ch. l. 1. p. 253. Now I will not deny,
but this hearing worship quo ad specium, as God is made the object of it, so it
is right: but quo ad invidium, as it hath circumstances and parts, so it is a
false worship: and this is so clear a truth as no man will deny it unless the
denier will deny all religion and reason, all sence' and scinence. It is not
sufficient (saith Rivetus Comment, in Hos, 4, 14, p, 152, unto the^ true wor'
ship of God, that a man erres not in the object which he ought to worship, that
is, if he propose to himself to worship the true God, but also that, that
manner bee exactly kept, which God hath prascriin his law: from the tenor or
rule whereof whosoever in the least departs the same cannot be held lawful.

He ends thus: Treat. And so far forth as a man hears, that is bearken too, and
reciues them by receiving it, he so far bearkens too and receives Christ. ^

Answ. This is spoken gratis, and without any foundation, and therefore not
more easily avouched then rejected. But say we grant that So far forth Christ
is hearkened too, andc. yet doth not this hinder but So far forth as he hears
in an Antichristitian assembly and a false officer, ^ and performs a religious
worship in away and manner which Idolaters have devised, andc. I say let his
(so far) stand, yet in these respects and consideration, He so far forth
hearkens too and receives Antichrist.

If I should put over the Treat, reasoning in spiriturl things, to things civil
and worldly: the very expression of them, would make them odious: For suppose
aman should use the help of a known sorcerer, to recover some lost gould or
silver; and being afterword reproved for it, would reply, Seeing they were good
things and from God, hee did well therefore to get them in the way and manner
that hee took. Or if a these offering certain stolen goods, should persuade
another to receive them, because howsoever he hath no right to give such things
away, yet seeing they are good, and from God, hee may take them safely: for it
is all one, whether they are received in away of false-hood and theift, or by
the Ieaue and grant of the true owner,

If these things appear vile and absurd, no otherwise is his reasoning here, if
it be with the eye of Judgment looked upon: the Priests for whom he pleads, in
the Scriptures are said to be robbers and thieves, yea Spiritual sorcery is
charged upon them. But all this with the Treat. is nothing; For so they deliver
good things, the same may be received from them in a work of their office. But
if a man stood before an earthly Judge, accused of using a forcerers assistance
to recover his lost mony^ or for receiving goods from a known theise, it would
not free him to say, the things are good which I took. Neither will it excuse
men when they shall appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, to say it was
the truth which they heard, though not in the way and order, which the word
taught them.

Be not deceived God is not mocked: Gal. 6, 7. for whatsoever a man sows that
shall he also reap.

SECT. 7.
NOw we come to the 5 Objection, the which is laid down for us, by the Treat.
thus: Yet such as hear them, have communion with their office of Ministry, what
in them lies.

It is the manner of some to set up marks, and afterwards to show their art, in
shooting of them down again. One would think that the Treat. former writings
against the hearing of false Ministers, were written by him, to be (as it were)
his But mark, that thereby he might show his skill and wit in striking down the
same afterwards. Touching the objection which he here frames for vs, and
undertakes the confutation of; It is his own, and under his own hand, even word
for word published to the world, and in defence of the same thing which he
brings it here for vs: as the Reader may see in his manumissi on to a
manuduction: page. 5.

But to let this pass, hoping it was rather a slip in his pen, then a downfall
in his judgment: Let us see now how he hits the mark, his answer to it is thus.

That is, they have no communion at all with it, if it lie not in them to have
any, as it doth not. If I hold up my hand as high as I can, I touch heaven with
my finger, what in me lies, do I therefore at all touch it: if such think to
have, or that they have any such communion, it is their error and Ignorance,
but makes not the thing to be the more then if they thought not so.

This is all his answer (a capite vsque ad pedes) from head to foot. Unto the
which I answer: 1. To his peremptory affirmation, (they have no communion at
al) may apply the saying fathered on the old Philosopher multi dicti^sed pauca
probate. Ple speaks much, but proves little: For our parts (as I have said) we
cannot take his bare saying, de jure et de fide, to bee a rule of faith to us,
For our consciences are not (like Simpson's shoulders) strong enough to bear
it,

2. He dallies and deceives by a general and ambigious term of Communion: If it
be intended in the order and way of Church-state, it is true then here is no
such communion, as have members gathered into a body politic. But if by the
word we understand such a communion, as makes the hearer really partaker of the
sin of the Officer; in this sense here is a communion of fellowship. For 1.
Hereby is allowance and approbation given unto a work of darkness; I say his
very presence there to hear, is an open countenancing of an unlawful officer in
an vnrghtteous course, tanquam legimae et sacrae actionis approbatio. As
Davenat. deter^ Quaest. 7. p 40. Slater Explic. Anal: in 1 Cor. C. 2 p. 92. and
others note in the like case.

2. It is apparent to a right discerning eye, that the ministers of Antichrist,
in all acts of their ministry, do use such ways and inventions in worshipping
of God, as are not commanded of God in his word, but be devises of men. Now
whosoever joins with the^ in the practice of such worship, becomes a partaker
of their sin and trangression. Of this writes Join. David. Veridicus Christian.
c, 28, p, 7. And the reason is, because he commits will-worship: for what is
well-worship? but to worship God not after his appointment, but our own. And
hence was Ahaz an Jdolater, eo ipso, for that as P. Martyr Comment: in 2 Reg,
^, 17 notes, he took the pattern of an Alter from Idolaters to serve the true
God, with it and by it.

3. When Israel did eat with the Moabites, they did communicate Ainsw; Annot,
on Numb, 25, 2, with them: but how was it? it was in that the meat there given
and taken, was in a public way of a false institution. This holds
proportionably true here: for we cannot separate the false state of the office,
from the administrations done by virtue of it, that is to make the latter so
ours, as not to be polluted in one respect or other with the foulness of the
former. Zanchie Quicu^{que} facris ali cuius communicate, is particeps
quo{que}; fic ejus, ad cujus c ^emmuni onemha bantam et conferuandam sacra isle
sunt ordinata. de vitio, axed. cult^. Opp. l. 1. These 11. clears this very
well. Whosoever communicateh in the holy things of another, he is made partaker
with him, for whose communion the holy things ordained, are kept and observed.

3. For his comparison, it is so far fetch, as that it comes not home to the
matter, but is an evil and idle wandering from it. When Saul fought to excuse
himself, he was demanded of Samuel, 1 Sam. 15. quid ergo sin vult vox pecuduin
astarum, what means then the bleating of the sheep in my ears: we may ask the
like of those men, who say it is no sin to hear in false Churches. what means
your vncouering the head and bowing the knee before idol? your keeping company
with Idolaters in their public worship? your observing the time and coming to
the place of their worship? your serving of God in such a way? is bring it to
the text of the word, compare it with the example of the Prophets, Christ and
his Apostles, bring it to the practice of the primitive Churches: it is quite
differing from it.

wee are sure in a true Church, the bending of the knee Psalm 95. 6., and other
signs of reverence, is to give honour and countenance to that state. Now the
reason of contraries is a like, and therefore as Calvin Comment. in 1 Corin.
15. saith, the same being done in a false Church, is no less allowance and
approbation of it: J say again every reverend submissive gesture, Deuteronomy.
5 9 hos. 13. 12 Eze 18 6. 1 Cor. 10. 16. 18. as bowing down, kneeling,
prostrating, lifting up of the eyes, and all other like lowly and lovely
behaviour do appertain and lead to Idolatry.

Again if the Ordinances of God, do associate and join the the faithful with
God, then the observation of superstitious institutions must needs link men to
the society of Idols, and so reasoned the said Calvin Ibid. 2. 17. And for any
to say, they do not countenance such Churches and Ministeries, or they will
not; herein their acts give their tongue the lie, for we are not to Judge of a
work, Non exarcana intention operantis, sed ex manifesta co^ditione operis.
Davan. Quaest. Determ. page 40. by the secret intention of the doer, but by the
outward condition of the work it self. For what Augustine Eo damnabilius agit,
queen quote mendaciter agit, sic agit tamen, vt eum populus veraciter agere
existimet. De Civit. 16, C. 10. blames Senica the Philosopher, may be said and
truly applied to these men, in this he did the more wickedly because what he
did, he did lyingly, for he did it so, as that the people though he did it
truly. If the Corinthians sinned, when they sate down at the Idols table,
because they kept them company whose end was superstitious, then it follows
questio^, that where the public end of a people is to committ will, worship,
whosoever hath any fellowship with them, is partaker of the same ungodliness.
Now no man J dare say, will affirm, that the public end and intention of the
people, is not to allow, honour, and reverence, their false Church, ministry,
Government andc, therefore howsoever some particulars, intend not so, yet
joining with such, as so profess and practice, they are guilty Society in sin
brings felloship in wrath. Forbes Com. in Rev. 18. pa 189. of the same sin,
though I will not say in measure and degree a like.

4. Howsoever the compariso^ here brought, proves nothing: yet so much there is
in it, as it overthrows the cause he stands for. For be it granted, that a man
holding up his hand as high as he can, doth not touch heaven materially, yet
understanding it in another way or sense, he may be said, and that truly to do
it. I desire our opposites to speak here sincerely as of God, in the sight of
God, whether a man bee less bound to make use of any institutio^ of Antichrist,
in divine worship: then bound, to join with a Harlot in any practice of her
uncleanness. As for example: suppose a man with a lustful desire, put forth his
hand after a woman who is locked up, and so out of his reach, doth he not touch
her? yes saith Christ, and hath committed adultery with her Mat. 5 28. Again
say he covet his neighbours money, and lift up his hand as high as he can after
it: doth he not touch it, though the same be out of his reach? yes saith God,
for he breaks the tenth commandment Exod. 20. 7. In short, imagine, a ma^
treacherously minded, streach forth his hand after the Prince, doth the not
touch him, albeit the other be out of his reach? indeed Gods law and mans law
too, so concludes. Hence then I conclude thus;

Whosoever lusts after aspirituall harlot, committed with her spiritual
adultery. But such as hear the word in false Churches do so: Ergo, andc.

The later part of the argument, which is only doubtful, is proved by opening
and applying the similitude thus. As they commit carnal whoredom, who have
fellowship with harlots in any degree; kind, or Practice of their whoredoms: so
in this cause, it must needs be spiritual adultery, to hear the word in the way
and manner we dispute of: because it is to have a fellowship or society with
the great whoorantichrist: I say it is to go all along with him in some acts,
orders, and devices of his spiritual whoredoms. And what I here lay down, is
laid down by the best learned in all ages, viz. that we must go out from
idolaters, as not to be beholding to them, for any of their rites, or ders,
institutions: neither serve the Lord in, or by any helps, means, furtherances
of their sinful devices, for to do otherwise, is to commit spiritual adultery
with them: so write Agustine Confess, lib 6, c. 2., Haeimo Comment. 1. Corin,
c. 10. v, 17., Calvin Sermon. on Levit. 19 27, p. 207., Bucer In censu^a c 9,
foal. 4. 71,, Martyr Comment. on Judge c. 2 v 3., Polanus Comment in Eze c 12 p
229, Porous Comment. in Hos c. 2. 16, 17., Zanchus Comment, in Hos c. 16, 17.,
Ainsworth Arrow against Idolat. c 2, p 8, Iacob Expofit; on co^m 2., Marburie
Catech. on co^m 2, Bilson Answ. to the Apol. of the semin. p, 22. Iesuitisme
par, 2, p, 515., D. Humfrey (a) and others.,

5. If a mans cause should be judged, only as his adversary lays it down, it
would bee a great prejudice and loss to him. might we have liberty to speak in
our own cause, we would bring in more exceptions against their delectable thing
Isa. 44, 9, then the state of the officer, albeit the Treat, speaks but little
else for vs.

For 1. In this kind of hearing, men undertake to doe an impossible thing that
is to serve two Masters, viz Christ and Antichrist, and each opposite to other,
and requiring diverse and contrary service at on and the same time se a book
entitled a light for the ignorant or the 3. estates. ffor the first commands
that the doctrines of the Gospel bee heard in a true Church, and Taught by a
lawful minister, and forbids the contrary, the later prohibiteth what the
former requires, and requires that the word he heard, in a false Church, and
taught by an unlawful minister. Now whether it be right in the sight of God to
obey Christ rather then Antichrist judge ye. Acts 4, 19

2. This is not only to simbolize with Idolaters, and to give special honour to
Antichrist, as we have before proved: but also a reviving of an error held by
certain old Heretics, as the Nicolaitans, Iranian: l; 1; c. 27, Euseb: l: 3, c,
29. Bisilides Cent, c, 5, p, 77., Helchesaits Cent, 3, c, 4, p, 98.
Priscillanists Cent, 4, c, 5, p, 403., andc. condemned inscripture, and by the
fathers which lived in them times. Their error was, that Christians in
worshipping of God, might outwardly conform the^selvs unto the practice of such
ways and means as Idolaters had devised, yet so, as they did inwardly and
secretly dislike of the intentio and ends, which the others had in the
observatio^ and use of them. Our opposites are here (manium inania consilium)
in judgment alike corrupt with the^. For though they daube it over with more
artificial cunning, to make their, delusion the stronger, yet for their
principles and maine grounds ( aspic a vipera) they are all one and alike, as I
shall make it good whenever any of them gives me occasion to reply.

3. It is such an act of religion as the paltry pedigree of it, is only
grounded upon the wit and will of man, void of all scripture, yea indeed all
show thereof, and therefore by learned rightly termed a mocking of God Luther
in Amos c, 7 p. 134, gross superstition Lavarat in los. 22., great rebellion P.
Mart in 1 Sam. 15., and wichcraft.

4. ibid 2128. It is so vile a thing as our blessed Martyrs, would rather give
their bodies to the fire then doe it. witness, Thomas Reed Acts and Monum,
page; 2197, and his wife and daughter, Raf Allerton bid 2^08:, Iohn Fatty ibid
2256., Iohn Moyes ibid 2217:, John Hallingdale ibid 2222., Joan Wast ibid
2134., Thomas Whut ^ll ibid 2029:, I fabell Foster ibid 2030. Iohn Cavil ibid
2074., Thomas Spicer ibid 2092. Thomas Ha^land ibid 2099., Iohn Rough ibid
2226., Roger Barnard ibid 2098:, Adam Foster ibid 2099., Robert Lawson e, John
Careless ibid 2114., Alice Benden ibid 2167., Thomas Harding ibid 1117;,
William Tims ibid 2078., mother Sem^n and her Soane ibid 2234:, Angels wife
ibid 2299., and many more. If any should object but these went not to the
Church because of the Mass: I answer; 1. they refused to go thither at all. 2.
many of them showed their dislike against this Hearing in particular, and
suffered for it greevious persecution, as the Reader may see in the places
quoted.

5. By this means men break their vow which they have vowed unto God: Among
other vows under the Law, the Ievvs had one which they named Cherem * that is
of the curse, a word derived of Charam, to wast, destroy, kill andc. and it
implied that such a thing, was separated and quite set of, and so a great sin,
either to-touch it, or put it to any use afterwards, Such a Vow doe all the
faithful make, when leaving Babilon, they plant their feet in the pleasant ways
of Zion. Their promise then is, not to touch the unclean thing any more, but
utterly to forsake all the orders, customs, institutions ways and worship of
antichristisme, and to practice entirely and only, ibid 2099., both for matter
and See P. Mart, Comment, in Judge, c, 1; v; 17. 18. m 1 Cor. 10 14, Esa: 2.
18. 20. manner whatsoever the Lord their God commands: Therefore in going back
to make use again, of any of her constitutions, and devised means, whereby to
worship God: in this men certainly foresweare themselves, and so are guilty of
fearful perjury before the Lord.

6 It is a worship before Idols, and mark it, not accidentally but purposely
present before them: and such Idols, as have a religious state in the worship:
And to do this, is against the clear tax of Scripture. Exo 20 5. 1. Cor. 10.
20. Psa. 106. 37.

And as Porous co^ment. in Hos^. 8 p 529. saith, is a post a sie from God,
great Idolatry, very scandalous in it self, ahorible abomination in the Lords
sight, and the end of it, causes death and wrath eternally. Rivetus, comment.
in Hos. c. 4, p. 151. writing of the same thing, ads thus: Howsoever such
worshippers have their minds void of superstition and intend to serve only the
true God, yet in truth (saith he) this they do not, but worship and serve the
Devil. Ainsworth Annot. in Exod. 20. 5. and Cartwright, Histo. Christ. lib. 1.
pa. 140. say the same.

7. In this men cast themselves upon temptations, P. Mart loc. com. clas. 2, c.
4 p. 209. Aret, in Mat. 4, 7, p. 155 and provoke the Lord so to wrath, as
justly he may give them up to satan and Antichrist, for to blind them and
harden their hearts.

8. A tender conscience by it will be wounded, and afterwards tanckle inwardly
as a thorne in the heel: in that it leads men to equivocation, dissimulation,
reservation, and in a kind to a denial of Christ, and to condemn themselves in
the things which they approve of. Davits heart smote him for a little. See
before in M. Gres molds cause.

9. It gives just cause of offence Melan. in Evang fest, mesh* p. 552. unto the
brethren weak and strong, and lies as a stumbling block in their way to hinder
the due practice of Gods ordinances.

10. By it Idolaters are caused to shut their eyes and harden Corneal. a lipid
in Epist. Each. Secun p. 505. their hearts against the truth: and so
consequently held the longer and stronger in the snare of the Devil.

11. It is for nature and kind the sin of the high places: For wherein did the
Isralites offend that way. But because (as Rivetus, quote fi bi adoratio nis
loca arbitrio delegerint in Hos. 4. p. 146. saith) of their own accord, they
made choice of them places for divine worship. Iunius Annot. levit, 17, 7.
saith so too: when they sacrificed in OLEO LOCO in any other place then the
Lord had prescribed, it was offered to D^vils. I will not here dispute of the
material place, I mean their temples of wood and stone, whether Christians in
them may lawfully perform public worship: But this I do affirm, and will stand
to it, that it is every way as evil to bring our spiritual offerings unto an
Idoll^state, and there in it, by it, or with it, to present the same unto God,
as it was unlawful for the Jaws under the law, to offer in the places before
named: some say, Lyran. comment. in Amo. 5 27. the former is much worse,
because the same was never warrantable, whereas the other sometime was, as we
have else where noted. page. 18. 19.

12. To conclude this practice takes away the cross of Christ and persecution
for righteousness. It decks an adulterer with the spoil of the spouse of
Christ. It makes schism in the Church in that men break the order, and bounds
which God hath set in it. Melan, in Evan doom. 4. Advent. p 94. Makes way for
greater evils as apostasy from God, sliding back to great ungodliness, Pare. in
Hos. 8. p. 592. and to bee corrupted in the substance of religion and purity of
Doctrine. And what shall I say more. It gratifies the Iesuits in commending
Maffeus In vita Ignite Laiola. blind obedience. and argues great presumptio^
and pride of heart, as if man were wiser then God, and could devise either some
better means, or some other way for his edification, then the Lord hath
prescribed D. Willet Comment. in 1 Sam. 15. 23.

I do not know what engine of wit and art some men have, to elude these
reasons, and to batter them so down, as to make a safe passage through for a
good conscience; For my part I confess such do go bejoynd my line and measure
of faith, I dare not bevvise aboue that which is written, it is enough for me
to know and believe, that in this point vvee have the word of God with vs and
for vs.

SECT. 8.
Our six Objection, Object. 6. as hee lays it down for us is thus. If there be
no communion at all between the Teacher and taught, what profit then comes by
such hearing.

To this his answer is. Treat. The Church Officer feeds the stock of Christ
over which he is set, as the object of his ministry. Such as come in, ( being
not in Church union therewith) hears him so doing as a stander by hears me talk
or dispute with another, andc, Here is communion only in the effects of the
truths taught. It were usurpation in any to partake in a Church previleidge
(which the office of ministry is) that were not in Church state first, and so
if hearing imported Church Communion none but in Church members might lawfully
hear.

The Treat. answers, are much like to one that turns himself many times about,
but moves not out of the place. All that he saith is (Homoeologia) one thing
often said over and over. That is a change of the state of the question, which
is not about Church-communion, but whether a believer, when hee hears a false
minister in a work of his office, doe such an action as can be proved lawful by
the word of God. Now to this (which is the maine Sacra scripture tota vera,
necessary sufficiens viatori consequen dum fine^ suum: nec est dubia via
salutes. Harum etiam explicatio and quantu^ adcreden da, and qua^ tum ad
speranda, et quantum ad operanda ex plicatur, ex diversis scripture loses.
Scotus in 1. sent. quaest. thing) we find nothing in the Treatise, but much
paper blotted ^ about questions and strifes of words, which are indeed vain and
unprofitable, and and whereof comes envy, strife, evil surmisings, rather then
edifying which is in faith so to doe.

If J should say nothing to this, some would say there were some thing in it.
Therefore I answer. 1. It is a false kind of reasoning (which Logicians condemn
under the term, non causae vt causae) when a thing is spoken either with
limitation or without, to conclude more the^ the proemisses: this fault the
Trea. commits here; For he would persuade vs, that because the Church-officer
and his flock are relatives, therefore no man, not in Church union hath
relation to his office. M. Constable. Cnrin. Metaph. l. 2. c. 1. R. Goclen. in
co^tr^v. log. p. 1, c. 18, Seal. c 93, de cause. Lat. But we are not altogether
such novices, but know a little how to distinguish Sophistry from Philosophy.

Touching Relation, the same may be considered, 1. in ordination, 2. in
application. For the first, which is a Relation by order, or conjunction, that
is, relation per se, as Logicians Fonsec. 5. Metaphy. c. 18 Quoest. 2, Sect. 3.
Temple. Metap. l. 4. Phrase it; Here now I grant in this kind of Relation no
man hath relation to the office of the Teacher, that is not in Church-communion
therewith. But for the second, which is, relation imperfect, or per accidens;
Here I affirm that in this kind: The Hearer, howbeit not in Church-estate, yet
hath relation, to the Office of the Teacher, and so far forth is the object of
his Ministry.

Aristotle Meta. l. 5, c. 5. speaking of sundry ways of Relations unto persons
and things, sets down these particulars: go where unlawful Ministers teach,
observe the time, hearken to their Doctrine, show the like outward submissive
gestures and reverence that others doe, perform divine worship there with them,
and among them: This is to have relation to the idol-state, both of Church and
Ministry, if the Philosopher speak truly.

Again, consider a relation in the parts thereof. 1. Here is subjectum, viz.
Hearing. 2. Fundamentum, i. e. a false-state. 3. Terminus, viz. superstition
(but our Opposites name it edification) 4. Relatum, to weet, the speaker. 5.
Correlatum, viz. the Hearer.

And howsoever, it may be said, that in respect of Church-union the Relation,
here is properly in the two later, that is, between the Church-officer and his
Flock; notwithstanding this cannot be denied: But for the other kind and way of
Hearing, albeit it be not the Relation, yet it is in Relation, and belongs
reallie to the praedicament or matter of the Relation.

I am sorry, that J am constrained to speak so often of Philosophy, but indeed
I can doe no less, considering, that leaving the Word of God, he seeks to lead
men a stray, by abstruse and ambiguous distinctions, strange and wrapping
words: Now, howsoever this may puzzel the understanding of some people, as not
able to apprehend the strong delusion, yet the truth is, let them be brought to
the rules and grounds of true Philosophy, Vera Philosophia cum S. Theology
nusquam pugnat: and quote in Theology verum est, etiam in Philosophia; and
country. Keckerm. dispute. Philos. p. 5 they are as unable to be defended by
art and reason this way, as by the Seriptures. Notwithstanding I doe desire the
person, whosoever he shall be that undertakes the cause here against me, to
prove what he saith by divine authority; For I would willingly deal with him by
that book alone, as by the book of all truth; Nay, I require Scripture, for
without it, I shall believe nothing, though he bring whole Cartloads of such
carnal caveling devises. But to proceed.

2. To apply the hearing in question, to a stander by, that hears a man to
speak occasionally, and in a private way: Here again, as in al the rest, he
takes his scope without orb or order; For where things are done, ex mero
alterius obsequio, by a power and institution, there can be no participation in
the administrations thereof, M. Constable. Cnirim. Metaph. l. 2. c. 1 but it is
a submission to the power, whether it be true or false. By such a gloss, the
Corinthians might finely have put of Pals reproof: Seeing we are not in union
with them, we can at their sacrifice only as standers by, and in a private way:
and so have no relation to the idol. But such a shift would not serve their
turn; For whatsoever they did, it was to be determined, and reputed, according
to the public acts, and not as themselves vainly fantised: So comment: in 1
Sam. c. 27 v. 4 Martyr, Chytraeus, De Eucharist. p. 216 and others.

The time was, when the Treat. thought that there was use Preface before
religious Commune. of a distinction of Religious actions, into personal and
Church-actions; and how he understood it, he shows afterwards: Treat. of
private Communion, page. 10 in private I communicate only with the prisons and
personal graces of holy men; in public I communicate with their Church-state
and order, as also with the public Ministry, and in, and with it with the
Prelacy, whence it is.

The truth here, is never the worse nor less, howsoever he left it, for he that
joins in the exercise and practice of public actions, he must necessarily join
himself to^ the State, Order, Ministry, andc. in which, and by which the same
are performed.

3. In this answer he plainly confutes himself: For mark all Readers that have
sense: In a true Church he grants, there is Communion between the Teacher and
taught, and the reason which he gives for it, is, because the Flock is the
object of his Ministry.

Now, if that in this way, make a Lawful Communion; then by necessary
consequence, there can be no hearing in the other way, but must be an unlawful
Communion; My reason is, because the Office of a Priest, is not an institution
of any one independent body, but of universal Hyerarchicall state, and extended
it self too, and over all manner of persons whatsoever, I say so many, as doe
congregate and bend an ear thereto.

If any should object and say, but many of them, are Parish-Priests, and so
resident in one place. I answer, this respects not the state of their Office at
all, but only imports a licence that some have from their Prelate, to doe
certain services specially in this or that Assembly; not that their Office of
Priesthood is here by any way limited or circumscribed, but is, (as we said
before) universal and every where over Sea and Land: Hence then, every hearer
must needs be the object of such a Ministry, and so communicates therewith, if
there be any weight of reason in the Treat. words. And here we have verified
the old saying.

queen 4. Where he saith, here is communion only in the effects of the truths
taught. Here is another invention of his own head, and makes true the saying,
La absurdo dato, mill sequuntur grant one absurdity, and a thousand will
follow. That the effects should be dividuated from the working-cause, is
against the rules of reason, Clement. Temple. Metaphy. l. 3, p. 251, 260. for
common principles show, that there is an essential connextion between them, and
the former is to be considered for quality and kind, as the later is. These
Canons are well known, as is the cause, so that which is caused of the doing of
the thing. Item qua item, semper facet item, Arrest. l. 2. de Gen. and corrupt.
c. 10, Again, Rodolph Goclen. c. 9 p. 90 as is the same, so always follows the
same effect.

We speak not here, of what may fall out by accident, Arrest. 2 Topic. c. 9, 5,
31, but of things considered in themselves. qualis causa tale causatum, And to
take it thus, and say, they effects are right and Lawful, when the instruments,
and working-causes are wrong and unlawful; Or to say, I may communicate in the
effects, and yet not with the instruments, or working-cause. It is (caput
vacuum cerebro) as vain a thing as ever man held.

If a Traitor or Rebel should set up one to be a Judge, another a Major, andc.
and give them commission to administer, justice publicly; Were it Lawful for
any of the Kings subjects to communicate in the effect of their
administrations, because the same in it self was just? I say no: For it were
treason so to doe. And is it a lesser offence, to offend God in a matter of the
like nature?

If a man may communicate in the effects of such actions (say good in
themselves) whose instruments and working-causes are unlawful: I say, let this
be granted, there are few Idolaters, Adulterers, Thieves, Witches, but will
easily excuse themselves. But as it is a Maxim in the civil Law, Fr. Connanus
Comment. juris civil. l. 5, c. 9; and grounded on the Law of God. Mart.
Azpilcueta Enchyrio, c: 17, p. 330, calls it a breach of the 7. ^ Comma^d. That
to have any thing rightly: just and lawful instruments must be used; So it is
in this cause here; For howsoever God may use what instruments he will: I say,
bring his purpose to pass by what secondary means he pleases, yet hath he bound
vs straightly, not to make use of any unlawful instruments or working-meanes,
(whether it be Church, Ministry, Worship, or any Rite or Order) in hope thereby
to have some good effects.

And here I desire our Opposites to tell me, seeing as the Treat. Treat. of
pub. commune. p. 29. confesses, that the Chancellor in the Consistory, and the
Priest in the Pulpit or Desk, doth administer by one and the same power:
Namely, that of the Prelate; which, from, and by him, both the one, and other
doth receive. Why a man may not as well communicate in the effects of the
administrations, done by the Chancellor in his Consistory, so they are truths:
As in the effects of the truths taught by a Priest in his Pulpit or Desk?

5. Though hearing simply imports not Church^communion: yet all hearing in a
Church-way, imports a justification and allowance of the state, both of the
Church and Ministry, in which, and by which a man is taught. And this we have
already so proved, that unless men resolve not to yield to the truth, which is
most plain, but to kick against the prick, and with Cavils, Glozings, and
facing out of things (like so many fovle feer to trouble the clean water) they
must needs see, and say, that the Treat. in this point held an error.

SECT. 9.
THe two next Objections, and his answers to them, are not worth the writing
down. If any other, doe otherwise think, I wish much good it may doe him, that
can make any good of it. But I proceed to the 9. Objection, which he frames in
this manner.

He that hears, Object. 9. appears to have communion with the Church and
Ministry; and all appearance of evil is to be avoided, 1. These. 5. 22.

To this, Treat. thus he answers: The Scripture is not to be understood of all
that appears evil to others out of an erroneous and deceived judgement, andc.
but it is meant either of the Doctrine in Proph^sie, andc. or of that which
appears evil to a right discerning eye. By this imagined exposition I might not
hire a house in a Parish, where I were not known: seeing thereby I appear a
Parish member.

Answ. 1. I know not in truth, what better to liken this answer, then to that
Nightingale, of whom a Lacedemonian Plutarch. in Apothed. lacon (when he had
plucked of her sethers, and saw only a little Karkesse left) said: Thou art a
voice, and nothing else. The truth is, the utmost that he hath here said, is a
mere colour of some thing, while nothing is to be found in it. For, what was in
the Objection, remains still virtualiter, for ought he hath said to it, or
against it.

2. If a man were to make a sword for his enemy, he would set as little edge
upon it as could bee, for to save himself. The Treat. in framing this, and
other Objections for us, is sure to make them blunt enought, that so they may
the less hurt him, and profitt us.

But seeing we have the weapon now in our own hands, wee will doe our best to
sharpen it. Our argument therefore here, shall be thus laid down.

Whatsoever is an appearance of evil, to a right discerning eye, the same ought
to be avoided.

But to hear unlawful Ministers in Antichristian Assemblies, is an appearance
of evil, to a right discerning eye.

Therefore it is a sin to doe it.

The Proposition is proved from 1. Thessal. 5. 22. and here granted by the
Treat. The Assumption is as certain by these reasons following.

For 1. This going to the place where they go, and hearing as they doe, is an
occasion whereby a man comes into a suspicion of idolatry, and that he is of
the same mind with the rest, whatsoever otherwise he pretends; And thus have
our Martyrs testified, as Smith Acts and Monu. 1876., Bradford ibid. 1829., and
others. And that this is an appearance of evil, both Papists, Eckius Tom. 3. in
fest. 5. Mesh. p. 706. and Protestants (d), doe acknowledge it. Peters
adjoining himself to the Jaws. Gal. 2. was ostentatio false opinion; is; as
Porous Exercit. Theol. ib. 2, p. 111. saith, a showing of the same error that
they did, though his private meaning was other wise: So here. B. Jewel en 1.
These. 5. 22. p. 219 Cent. 2, l 2, c. 4.

2. It is an appearance of evil, when men doe that, which causes others to fear
they are unsound. But such a fear is here justly caused; For many holy men have
counted these Table-Gospellers Act. Monum. p. 1876, and 1829. and said they did
it, to avoid persecution; And reputed this action much like the Counsel in the
profane Orator. Server temporibus apientis semperest habitum. Tul. in Ant. It
is always thought great wisdom to apply ones self unto the times. The reason
wherefore Iohashaphat is blamed for his affinity 2 Chro. 18. 1. with Ahab, was
queen scandalum dedit subjectis guess fores non improbaret idolatriam, quam
domi abrogaverit? This is their cause, Porous Exer. Theol. l. 2 p. 101. who go
to false Churches: It makes the Godly to think, that their performances among
them, are not perfect; But that they have some sinister ends, both in coming to
them, and going back again to the other.

3. When idolaters see us present at their worship; they must needs hereby be
hardened and hartened in superstition; And this is another breach of that
precept in 1. These. 5. 22. It is observed of some P. Mart. Loc: Commune. Clas.
3, c. 2, p. 241. that Namaan might not doe any civil reverence in the House of
Rimnon, least through any appearance or show of idolatry, some might be
strengthened by it, in false worship.

Augustine Tom. 10 Home. 6. writes very well to this purpose: Doe ye ask me
(saith hee) how the Gentles may be won? How they may be called to salvation?
FORSAKE THEIR MEETINGS, let go their toys, and then if they agree not to our
truth, let them be ashamed of their fewnes. This Counsel wee shall doe well to
follow; For there is not a readier way to bring people off, from their
idolatry, then to let them alone Hos. 4 17. See Iunius on the place. as Gods
bids us; Keep away from all their human forms and fashions of Religion, and
especially such as are round about us, and live amongst us, as Cartwright Reply
1. to Whitg: p. 131. excellently shows.

4. It hath a show of evil, in that it is a matter of active scandal, and gives
occasion to our brother, to fall into that evil. whereof it hath ashew; to wit,
that there is no just cause to separate from false Churches, but that people
may remain members thereof: And howsoever, there be not here an intention in
the doer, to draw another into sin, yet of itself Quando ipsum factum est tale,
quote de sui ration habear, quote sit inductivum ad peccandum put cum aliquis
public facet peccatum, vell quote habit similitudinem peccati. Equine. 2.
quest. 43. Art. 1. a. 4. this is an inducement to it; And gives another
occasion to fall. And so much in effect writes Zanchy Explic. in 1 These. 5.
22. p. 419, Tom 6., on the place.

5. This is not without appearance of evil and scandal, because hereby, men
seek to uphold such ways and inventions in divine worship, as the Lord of old
hath ordained to destruction ler 51. 26 2 The. 2 8. Rev. 18., Merdecah would
not give countenance, nor reverence to one of that Nation Brent. Comment. in
Hest. c. 3, v 2., whose name God had appointed to be blotted out under Heaven.

Wherefore did the Lord give so straight a charge unto Israel, to break down
Altars Deu. 7, 5., groves high-places, andc. Vt ex eo intelligamus, because,
saith Junius Anal. in Deu. 12 p. 71. by this we should understand, that they
were not to retain any thing that concerns either the substance or show of
Idolatry. Calvine Comment. in Esa 27, 9. speaks the very same: (So detestable
is idolatry before God) Vt eius memoriam vult penitus deleri, no posthac ullum
eius vestigium appareat.) That he will have the very memory of it utterly to
bee abolished, least any footstept thereof should appear afterword.

Iacob abolished out of his House not only the idols, but the earrings, Gen.
35. 4. because they were superstitionis insignia: Monuments of superstition; As
Calvin Comment. in Gen. 35 4., Monilia Idolise consecrate: Jewels consecrated
to idols; As Porous ibid.: Res idolatry pertinents: Things appertaining to
idolatry, as Iunius ibid..

To be short, would not God have the Jaws under the law, to countenance any
human devise, whether Ministry Numb. 8 22. 24. Numb. 4. 24, 31. and 1847,
Ministration, Altar, Sacrifice, Sacraments, either by word, Psa. 16. Hos. 2,
16, 16, 17. writing, presence, assembling together Deu. 16, 1, 6 1 King. 12,
32., observing the time, coming to the place, bowing down Deu. 5, 9. Ps. 95, 6.
Hos. 13. 2. Eze. 18, 6. Neh, 10, 32. 37. Ex. 30, 16. Eze. 5, andc., kneeling,
lifting up the eyes, paying of tithes (g), Offerings, Contributions, andc. And
shall wee think that all these outward obseruances, are now out of use, and
that men in such respects may publicly countenance the ways of Antichrist. As
for such, as so think, let them know, they are in error and sin; And as the
Papists have condemned Montanus for an Heretic, and yet raetine among them his
vile opinions. So doe these men, embrace the lies and beastly vanities of H. N.
that monstrous Monster, although in words they will disclaim all Familisme. As
cats love not the Master of the house, but his housholds-goods: so many say
they can^ot abide the Pope, and yet love his household stuff to well.

Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding.

For the instance, which hee brings of hyring a House in a Parish, it is
discrepant and impertinent, and so of no validity. For, let Barnards Consirat.
Eugene. l. 3. useful Canon be observed, an liceat, an deceit, an expediat, vvee
shall soon see, there is no agreement between it, and the thing he applies it
to.

For first, the Law of God allows us, to live where wicked men doe; and to have
necessary society with them in civil things; And thus the godly in all ages
have practised. But let them show us, where it is written, that we must go,
unto their unlawfull-Church-meetings, and there worship God with them, and
among them. I ask again, who of the Saints hath done this? The Lord ler. 15.
19. saith: Let them return to thee, but return not thou unto them.

2. It is seemly that we dwell among them; and reciprocally give and take
earthly helps each of other. Compossessores mu^di non erroris. Wee must be co
partners with them in the world but not in their errors, saith Tertullia^. But
in Religion we may not use any of their devises, as means and furtherances of
our edification.

Alias was careful to repair the Lords Altar; For as Martyr In his Comment. on
the place. saith, he judged it an unbefitting thing, and a great indignity to
God and his truth, to Offer Sacrifice on Bails Altar. If men in those days had
the Zeal of that good Prophet, they would scorn and loath to make use of any
thing that is Antichrists. I say it again, were men zealous for the Lord God of
Hosts, they would fear to run to false Churches and Ministers to be edified. Is
it not because there is not a God in Israel that ye go.

3. This also is behovefull and expedient, as the Apostle 1 Cor. 5. 10. saith;
But the other is not so, as we have before proved. For Conclusion, wheresoever
I live, my constant absence from their Church is an evident token, that I have
left them; But on the contrary; if I go thither to worship, this gives them
just cause to think that I approve of their unsanctified standing; Whosoever
therefore can make these two things hang together? I must needs say, quid libet
equolibet, of every thing hee can make any thing. But of this no more now: let
us hearken to what follows.

SECT. 10.
THe next Objection is thus laid down: None can hear without a Preacher: None
can preach, except he be sent, Rome. 10. 14. 15. Therefore I cannot Lawfully
hear him, that hath not a Lawful sending.

His answer to it is: Treat. 1. That Conclusion is neither in the Text nor
sound. 2. I may Lawfully hear him that hath no Lawful calling, as I have
formerly showed. 3. The sending there intended is Gods gracious work of
providence in raising up men, by enabling and disposing them to preach, andc.
4. If faith came by the preaching of unlawful Ministers, it follows thereupon,
that such Preachers are sent in the Apostles sense. This is the sum of his
answer.

Answ. It was a cunning trick, which Themostocles was once taught by a man of
Lacedemonia, that because they might not take the Tables away, wherein a Law
was engraven; He should therefore turn them up-side down, which was as good as
to take them away altogether. Howsoever, the Treat: takes not from us the
Tables of holy Scriptures, wherein is written the Law of Christs Ministers, yet
by a pretty devise, hee turns them here upside down: Which is as good as to
take them quite away. J know what J speak, and will stand to it; For if this
place, Rome. 10, 14, 15. respects not a true outward calling, but is to be
understood promiscuously of all Ministers, be their calling never so false,
devilish, Antichristian. I say, if this Text be so to be interpreted, then have
not the Ministers of God any more to say for the justification of their
standing, then the Ministers of Satan (I use Pals phrase 2. Cor. 11. 15.) have
to say for theirs. Yea moreover, hence the base Familists H. N. his Exhort. to
his Children., and such giddie-heads, who deny all outward calling to
particular men and say, every one that can preach the Word, are Ministers
alike; Are justified He that justifies the false claim of a usurper* condemns
the party, whose title is right and good. in their most vile assertion. ^
facinus horrendum, sancti viri.

But to clear the Text from the Treat: false gloss; And by it, to prove the
truth, which we hold; I will here lay down this argument.

If Paul by sending, Proof 1. Rome. 10, 14, 15. doth not at all intend unlawful
Ministers: Then are not unlawfll Ministers to be heard: But the first is true,
therefore the second.

The proposition which needs only to be cleared, may bee thus manifested: Such
as the Apostle intended, Rome. 10. ought and may Lawfully preach: But
Antichristian Ministers, neither ought nor may Lawfully preach; Ergo, the
Apostle, Rome. 10, means not Antichristian Ministers.

The Major is most evident, and cannot be denied by any that bears the face of
a Christian. The Minor is clear and certain by these Scriptures Hob. 5; 4.
Numb. 16. 5, and 18, 7, 2 Chro, 26 18 Act. 14 23. ler. 23 21.. Besides granted
of all, both Papists and Protestants. To wit, that it is great sin to exercise
any spiritual functio^ or Ministry, without a true outward calling. Of this
judgment were Francis Ribera Comment. in Hob. 5, 4., Toletus In Joh. 10. page:
597., Royardus Feria La: Post. Pent., Luther Comment. in Gal. c. 1; v. 8.
Porous Comment; in Hob. 5. 4;, Piscator ibid., Ames Cas. Consc. l. 4. c. 25.
Slater, On Rome. 2. v. 3., Cartwright Repl. to Whitg; p. 54 63., Wilson
Comment; on Rome. 10; v. 15., Bilson Chur; Governors., and others.

2. If we may Lawfully communicate in, and with that Ministry, which the
Apostle speaks of, Rome. 10. 15. then he intends not here any unlawful
Ministry. But the first is true; Ergo the later is true also.

The Proposition cannot be doubted off. The Assumption wee prove by our
Opposites Confession; For they grant, it is unlawful to communicate in, and
with a false Office.

3. If the Holy Ghost doth testify that by sending, Rome. 10. the true and
Lawful Ministers of Christ are intended: Then are not false and unlawful
Ministers intended in that place. But the first is true; Ergo the later is true
also.

The Proposition is grounded on the words of the Text: How shall they preach,
except they be sent? As it is written, how beautiful are the feet of them that
preach the Gospel of Peace, and bring glad tytings of good things.

These words are taken out of Esa. 52. 7. where the Prophet (according to the
interpretation of all Learned men upon the place) hath reference to the
Ministers of Christ; I say, to such only, whose outward calling (whether
extraordinary or ordinary) was Lawful and true.

So Cyrillus Comment. in Esa. 52. 7., Dionysius ibid., Areularius ibid., Wigand
ibid., Hyperius On the place., Bullingerus ibid., Mollerus ibid;, Zwinglius
(x), Marloratus ibid;, Guilt ibid;. Musculus ibid;, Vrsinus ibid;,
Oecolampadius, and others.

The Assumption needs no proof; except a man would make some question, whether
it should be day, when it is manifested to him, that it is not night.

4. If unlawful and false Ministers are not sent from God; But from the Devil
and Antichrist; Then doth not the Apostle in Rome. 10. 15. intend false and
unlawful Ministers; But the antecedent is true; Ergo, also the consequence.

The Major or antecedent is ground ibid; on these Scriptures Ier. 14: 14; Rev 9
3; and 13; 14; 15; 16 and 18; 15 17; 2 These. 2; 3; 4; 2 Chro. 11. 15; Rev. 16.
3.. And among other reasons laid down by Zanchy Queen non mittuntur ab eo, sed
a Diabolo. Explicat. Philip; 3. 1 p. 176; Tom. 4., wherefore unlawful Ministers
^h^uld be avoided, he gives this for one; Because God sends them not, but the
Devil. So Cartwright @ Repl; to Whitg. p. 88; 204. speaking of the Hierarchy (
which comprehends all false Offices in the Kingdom of the Beast) saith, it came
out of the Bottomless pitt of hell, and from the Devil. Perkins Expos. Sermon;
mount. Mat 7; p. 239; vol. 2., Porous Comment; in Mat. 24. 23., Musculus
Comment, in Mat. 7., Latton Syons Plea., the Authors of the Admonitions to the
Parliament Admon. 1., and others say so too.

The Assumption is as manifest; For durst any man affirm, that Ministers not
sent from God, but from Satan and Antichrist, are here meant by the Apostle.

5. Such have a promise of Gods gracious presence with them, and of his
blessing on their labours and Ministry, who are said, Rome. 10. 15. to be sent;
But unlawful Ministers have no such promise of Gods presence with them, nor of
his blessing on their labour and Ministry. Therefore by sending Rome. 10. the
Apostle intends not unlawful Ministers.

He that should deny this argument, would show more spite then wit; For both
pa^ts are as clear as the Sun at noon-day. For the other part of the reason,
there can be no exception against it; For seeing this place, which is the
foundation of their cause, is very Sand; the whole building (like a tottering
wall) must needs fall to the ground.

2. For his saying; He hath before showed, that it is Lawful to hear him that
hath no Lawful calling.

I answer, I cannot find this proved any where in his Book; For I profess in
the word of truth, I see little difference between his grounds for hearing in
false Churches; and the Nicolaitants reasoning for eating in idol-Temples.

For thus they would plead: Euseb: lib: 3; cap. 29; Ireuaen lib: 1. c. 25 Meats
and Drinks are the good Creatures of God, and may be used in a civil way
Lawfully; Now we receive them no otherwise, whatsoever ends and respects others
have.

nominee What is the Treat. plea but the same: Hearing is a natural action: And
although he hears false Ministers, yet is not his private meaning to honour the
state of the Office, as the rest doe. Thus (Chius ad Coum) their Doctrines are
alike.

But doth not this in the mean time, show a desperate cause, which hath not any
authentical records of the Holy Ghost. Under the shadow whereof, it can find
any shelter to shroud it self.

What, in the whole Book of God Evangelicae and Apostolicoe literae, and
veterum Prophetarum Oracula perspicue nos instituu^t, quid oporteat sapere de
voluntate, and sensu Dei. Ponentes ergo contentione^ ex divinitus inspiratis
Oraculis {que}uaeram is solutionem eorum, quae proponuntur. Theod. lib. 1; c.
7. is there not one place of Scripture to be found? What, nothing in the
Prophets? Nothing among all the writings of Christ and of his Apostles? But it
must bee held up (as the Apostle speaks ^) by the slight Ephes. 4. 14; of men,
and cunning craftiness, whereby they lay in wait to deceive.

Against this kind of reasoning, I might here bring that exception which
Tertullian De praescript: adverse: hereat. did of old against his Opposites.
What hath Athens to doe with Jerusalem, the School of Philosophy with the
Church of Christ.

In matters of faith men should so weigh and consider of things, as not to
write what reason, but what Religion, not what Philosophers, but what the
Prophets and Apostles, not what fancy thinks, but what the Spirit of God doth
say. Sensus nostri, and enarrationes sine his testihus non habent fidem.
Origin: in Hierom. Home. 1.

Indeed, if a man list to be contentions, he may find something to say to every
thing, though little to purpose to any thing; For what cause so bad, but some
will have a colour for it.

Hath not the Stews of Rome found Patrons Harding in confutat. of the Apolog.
Have not some defended commons of Wives P. Clemens.; yea and worse too;
Therefore with the Prophet this shall always be my prayer: O let me not vvander
from thy Commandments; Remove from me the way of Lying; And take not the Word
of Truth out of my mouth.

3. For his Exposition, it is drawn in by the hair of the head; And well, Psal.
119 10. 29. 43. it resembles a Shipman's hose, for you may apply it to what you
will, rather then to the point in hand. There is not a Writer, I am persuaded,
that ever gave such a sense of the place; As if wisdom had been borne with him*
and should dye with him.

I shall not steppe out of the way, to call in here a few well deserving
audience of the Learned. Famous Porous Comment. in Rome. 10. 15. an interpreter
one of a thousand; upon the place writes thus: How shall they preach, except
they be sent, why so? What hinders but he may preach that is not sent? indeed
he may so to doe, but not as Gods messenger: For as no man is the Kings
Ambassador, unless he have his Commission: So such Preachers as will declare in
Gods name his mercies and benefits, ought necessarily to be sent by him; For he
rejected all them as intruders, which run and teach without his Commission.
Unto the preaching therefore of the Word, a calling is required, andc. And
though hee speak here properly of the Apostolical Commission, which was
extraordinary. Notwithstanding it must also be understood of ordinary
Ministers: For none is a Lawful Preacher of the Word, except God call him. Now,
the Lord calls some immediately, as of old the Prophets and Apostles. Others
mediately by an outward calling of the Church. So he. The very same Hyperius,
Fagius, Ochinus, Tossanus, Olevianus, Grinaeus, Martyr, Rolloc, Hunnius,
Rungius, Brentius, and others on the place.

Now, howsoever false Ministers are not sent of God, according to the intent of
the Apostle, Rome. 10. 15. yet I confess, he hath a special guidance,
government and direction, both in their raising up, coming forth, and preaching
such and such truths, for the good of his elect in many places where they come.

It is said of Josephs Brethren, that out of envy they sold him to the
Midianites Gen. 4, 8.; and yet the Scripture else-where saith Gen. 45. 3. 8.
Psal. 105 17.; God sent him into Egypt.

Now, surely the same God, which could use their malice, by which he was sold
into Egypt, for the corporal profit of his people there; he can use as well the
power Porous in Comment. Gen: 45 7. p. 429. Tom. 1. of Antichrist, (by which
the Ministers of false Churches have their calling) for the spiritual comfort
and good of his chosen ones. And howsoever hee is no author of unlawful
Ministeries: Neither can it be properly said that he sends them: Yet he so
wisely ordered and disposes of them, that he brings to pass hereby his own
purpose and will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, in the propagation
of the Gospel, to the conversation of many.

But let it here be remembered, that their places for all this, are not the
better, neither their administrations the more warrantable; Nor any people the
more justified to hear them, then were Iacobs Sons to be justified in what they
did to their Brother, because the Lord by it did them good.

That which God doth this way, is not of any promise Cartwright, Home. in
Eccles. c. 3 foal 83. 84. that he hath made, but out of his superabundant
grace, turning the sins of his people (as the Apothecary doth poison to
Medicines) to their profit and good. Things done by unlawful instruments, so
far as they respect the accomplishment of Gods will and pleasure, either in the
safety of his Church trial of his Childre^ andc. the Scripture attributed them
to God; as author and doer; and so far forth are most holy works; But so far as
they respect the action done, and instruments; they are wicked works, and they
instruments are sent from the Devil Porous in Hos. 8. p. 529.

Lastly, that which he saith follows, it follows not, but is (^) a Conclusion
il-gathered. But I see it is an easy thing to conquer, if begging will procure
one that. Put case usurpers of civil offices, should by their administrations
profit some people; Must it follow thereupon, that such men are sent forth by
the King? Indeed so it must be taken, or else the Treat: exposition is neither
in the Text, nor sound. But (cadet in cursu) he runs in vain, as he hath done
all the way before.

Before I end this Section, I desire to ask one thing of our Opposites. Suppose
there be a man whom they would hear, but know not whether ever any conversion
hath followed his preaching: May they in such a case hear him or no? If they
say yes, then wherefore are the effects of false Ministers made the maine
ground of hearing them? If they say no? Then how can they hear any? Considering
they know not certainly by whose preaching another is converted. As is the way
of an Eagle in the air, such is the way of an adulterous Woman, it is hid and
cannot be seen.

SECT. 11.
THE 11. Objection is thus laid down: The sheep of Christ hear his voice, but
strangers they will not hear: Joh. 10. 3. 8. 37.

He answers: Christ doth not there speak of the outward hearing, but of the
hearking unto; that is, as he expounds himself, Verse. 3. 4. 5. 14. 16. 26. 27.
of the knowing and believing of his voice, and following it, andc.

Answ. It is a speech of Augustine No sitis multi Magistri dissentientes a
Doctrine vnici magistri Christi. in Lib. 1. detraction.: Be not many masters,
dissenting from the Doctrine of Christ, our only Master.

The Counsel is good, for it is a great sin and hurtful vice, to be rash and
adventurous upon opinions, in matters of Religion, where men are not first well
informed in judgement, by true grounds of knowledge. Now truly I have not seen
in so short a Tract. any man that hath more adventured to broach private
conceits In Ecclesia ponitur idolum, queen do novum dogmastatuitur. Ier. in
Her. 32., then the Treat: and to single himself out from all writers, ancient
and modern. As if his fancies like Oracles were to be licked up; and his ^, he
said, as another Pythagoras Diogen. Laer. in Pythag. must be rested in; or as
the Popes Traditions Counc. Tren. Sess. 4. dec. 1. p. 11. distinct. 19. c. sic
omnes. to be received, as if Chrst spake them. But before I come to discover
the nakedness of his answer, I will first from this Scripture lay down this
argument.

Such as Christ intenteth by strangers in Ioh. 10. 5. may not Lawfully be
heard.

But Christ by strangers in Ioh. 10. 5. intends unlawful Ministers.

Ergo unlawful Ministers may not Lawfully be heard.

The Major is without controversy. For 1. the Greek ^, is of that plainness, as
no wit of man can put by the ^orce thereof; Properly it imports a going after
another bodily Mat. 4. 20. 22. 25. Mar. 1. 18. Ioh. 1. 37. 38. 40. Act. 11.
18.; as a Scholar follows the Master to be taught.

2. It cannot be showed If they can, let them. that words so generally laid
down, as these, (^, andc.) are used any where to restrain a person only from
believing the Doctrines of false Teachers, and allowing him in mean time freely
to hear them.

3. Whereas Christ saith, they will flee from him, this must surely bee
understood, animo and corpora: For otherwise with reverence be it spoken: The
prohibition here were unnecessary and vain: Considering if true Ministers shall
err in Doctrine, wee must fly from it 1. These. 5 21;. So then by this
Exposition, there is nothing more meant of flying from strangers, then from
Christs own Household servants. The which to affirm is ^, as the Philosopher
saith Arrest. l. 2. Elench. c. 3., absurd and idle.

Finally, Learned Men generally, understand it of flying with body and mind.
And so not to come near the breath of unlawful Ministers. So Augustine De verb.
Doom. Sermon. 49, Cyril Comment. in Ioh: 10. l. 8; Tom. 1, Chrysostom Home. 83.
in Ioh., Calvin Comment. in Ioh. 10. 5;, Hunnius ibid;, Zepperus ibid. Tossanus
Comment. in I. 10. 5., Stumfius Postal: Allege. Doom. 8. Post. Trinit. p. 481,
Royardus Home: in sorry tert. Pent., and others.

The Minor is undeniable, and proved 3. ways. 1. By divine Pro 2, 16 and 10,
20, 24. and 7. 5 authority, which gives them often this title. 2. By their
agreement and likeness: in Scripture men are named strangers in 4 respects. 1.
Of their strange sect. Mat. 17 25. Esa. 62 8 2. Of their strange Religion. Mar
2 11. Ps 81. 9; 3. Strange Laws. Judge. 19, 12; Neb. 92. And lastly, of the
strange work Luck. 16, 12. and service which they doe. This holds true here in
the case of unlawful Ministers; For 1. they are not citizens with the saints
and of the Household of God We speak not here of the invisible Church, but the
true visible. 2. Their way and manner of serving God, is contrary to the rules
and orders, which hee hath praescribed. 3. Their Canons and Institutions are
none of his, but Satins and the Bishops. 4. In their administrations
(according. to their Service-Booke;) they serve not Christ, but Antichrist.
Mali thripes, mali ipes.

3. By the testimony of Learned men, as Porous Comment: in Hebr: 5, v. 4. p.
211., Polanus In Ezech. c 44; p 800., Danaeus Comment. in 1 Timot. 5, 22, p.
343;, Toletus in Ioh. 10, p. 597., Luther Enarrat. in Evang. Tom. 5, p. 158.,
Hoffmister Home. in Evang: Doom. 9; Post Trinit., Guiliaudus Comment. in Gal.
1, p. 241., Poligenarus Doom, 7, post pont in Evang: p. 26., Topiar In Evang;
Doom. 8; post. Trin; p. 73., Anton: Gonigston Postil; Oct; post. pent; p. 175;,
the Rhemists Annot; in Ioh: 10; v. 5.. All these affirm, that vvhosoever takes
upon him to preach without a Lawful sending, comes in, not by a Lawful
Election, and holy Church Ordinance, but breaks in against Order; By force and
favour of men, and by humane Laws. he is a stranger, a thief, a murderer,
according to Christ, saying in Io. 10. and thus have the old Writers expounded
the place. As Irenaeus L. 4. c. 4., Clem: Alexand. L. 1. Stromat. Cyprian Lib.
1. Epist. 6 and 76., Didymus In Ioh: 10., Rupertus In Ioh. 10., Theodorus
ibid., and others.

To come now to the Treat: 1. His whole answer is merely a declining from the
state of the question.

A negation unius disparatorum ad positionem alterius non valet argumentatio.

He reasoned for all the World, as if one should reason thus: A man may not put
in practice the bad Counsel of a murderer or thief; Ergo, he may hear them.
Christ (saith he) will not have us to believe and obey the unsound Doctrines of
strangers; Ergo, he doth not speak of the outward hearing of them.

Diffido oculis maize, and identidem interrogo, an legerim, an viderim Plin.
Paneg.

I suspect my sight, I question my Copy, I ask of my self again and again,
could the Treat. write so unskilfully; For if this be not a non-sequitur, then
fools cannot speak Nonsense.

2 His distinction between hearing and hearking, is much like to that of the
Papists Bellarm. de Eccles. triumph. l. 1. c. 12., between Duly and Latria. The
Scripture forbids worshipping of angels: True say they, as Mediators, Hassels
pro invoke. c. 19. p. 47. so it is unlawful, otherwise not; Christ bids us to
fly from strangers, and not to hear them: yea, saith he, as to obey their
Doctrine? otherwise we may follow them, and hear them; is not this to presume
above that which is written? Surely, if men may take such boldness in
expounding of the Scriptures, the grossest Idolater may excuse himself easily.

3. I grant that to hear is some time taken for believing, approving,
following, andc But what of this? Will it therefore follow, that Christ in Ioh.
10, 5. doth not speak of the outward hearing of strangers.

I may safely protest his proof here, is only his bare opinion And so it is all
along the book. And he argues ex non confesses: From that which is not granted.
I think no wise man will engage himself to defend the conclusion, which cannot
be defended. No conare quid fieri non potest.

4. Where he saith, the strangers of whom Christ speaks, were of the true
Church and of Israel.

If his meaning be, that Christ here hath respect only to them, he is greatly
deceived. For he intends all strangers, which in the sense of the Scriptures,
either then were, or afterwards should come into the world, whether of the true
Church and of Israel, or not.

It hath hitherto been a ruled case among divines, not to distinguish where the
Word makes no distinction; But the Treat: keeps seldom this Canon; For as
Lizards, who out of the open field doe run into Bushes; So he leaves the plain
Text, and literal sense of the Scriptures; And turning their necks clean about,
I hear that some say, that these later works of the Treat. are far better then
the first. Now, these say so, because they lead to loose walking, and therefore
they like them the better. For otherwise they are much worse. Unless to prove a
thing soundly by the Word of God: is not so good as a bare and bold
affirmation, makes them speak what he pleases; And by this means neither deals
with the Objectson, nor cause of the Lord, as is meet. I hear that some say,
that these later works of the Treat. are far better then the first. Now, these
say so, because they lead to loose walking, and therefore they like them the
better. For otherwise they are much worse. Unless to prove a thing soundly by
the Word of God: is not so good as a bare and bold affirmation

5. It is a question, whether the Godly in the Jewish Church, having by hearing
discovered the Scribes and Pharises to be strangers, that is, false Prophess,
mought afterword hear them again. The Treat See his justificat. separate. page.
434. was once of the mind that they might not; and gave some reasons for it To
be lightly moved in Religion, is Childish weakness, saith he: divine and More.
Observe. p. 44. It had been a happy thing, for the Church of God, if he had not
showed such a Childish weakness.. But howsoever, the case is not easily to be
determined; considering the state of that Church and time; Yet this is clear to
all men of sound judgment, that in the Churches now under the Gospel, false
Prophets may not bee suffered; But after due and orderly conviction, ( being
found so, and obstinate) they are to be rejected, and so no outward hearing of
them any more. Of this judgment Camerius Comm. in. Apoc. c. 3., Borrhaeus In
Apoc. c. 3., Tossanus In Mat. c. 7., Oecolampadius In Mat. c. 7., and others

Lastly, by his answer, all false Prophets may bee heard; For, if nothing make
a false Prophet, but (as hee saith) unsound Doctrine; And Christ doth not
forbid the outward hearing of such; Then what I said follows necessarily. Now,
if this were true, Lord, in what a miserable case were Gods people. But it is
neither so nor so; For the Scriptures show the contrary; besides he contradicts
here himself, and is so variable and unsettled in that thing. As it may be said
of him as it was said Melanch. in Crone. of Severus: Omnia fuit and nihil fuit.
Hee turns every way, and cannot pass any way. He anglieth in all waters, and
yet catches nothing; he hath spent all his oil, in making a salve for the foul
sore Antichristian Priests; and yet to say (as the truth is) hath left them in
a worse cause For they need not by his writing leave their unblessed standing.
For so they only preach the truths of the Gospel. They sin not. And then what
need is there to lay down their false Office. then he found them.

SECT. 12.
THe 12. Objection follows thus: The Scriptures of the Old and New Testament
warn Gods people of false Prophets; which the Ministers of that Church are,
having an unlawful calling.

To this he thus replies: Treat. 1. They warn not to hearken to them, nor to
believe them; But to try them, which without hearing them, cannot be done. Not
that all false Prophet are to be heard by all, that they might try them; For
that were to tempt God: But now I answer Not as Apollo answered the Jaws by the
Scriptures Act. 18. ult. for so he could not: seeing hee writes against them.
the Scriptures cited; which speak of Prophets in the true Church, which were to
be heard, till they were orderly repressed, or at least plainly discovered by
their Doctrine heard to be such.

Answ. The soldiers which served Marcus Antonius, fell unawares on an Herb
Appian. de Bell. Parts., the which greatly distempered their heads. To say,
what my mind gives me, it was an unhappy thing, that ever the Treat. found out
this Wild gourd, for it much weakened his large abilities, and caused him in
this point, to be no more like the man, that he was, when he was against it;
Then an apple is like a nut. We cannot apply the saying in the Greek Proverb to
him ^. Our later thoughts be wiser then our first. For here he rather striveth
then teaches; As Ierom. confesses of himself, being reproved by some, for
writing some thing against lovinian (as the Treat: doth against us) by way of
contention, rather then of Doctrine, Hierom, in Apolog. ad Pammachiu^ pro
libris adversus Iovinian.

Some thing he would say here, but to profess my own ignorance, I doe not
understand him.

For 1. he peremptorily denies the whole Objection; and so conquently affirms
that all False Prophets may be heard; yet presently with the same breath, he
unsays what hee had said before; And says, all false Prophets are not to be he
heard by all; And within 4 lines after, lets both sayings fall again, and
saith, false Prophets, being discovered so to be, are not to bee heard. This is
so deep and inextricable a riddle for me to unfold, that I must confess my self
here Davus, not Oedipus. And therefore will leave it for what it is, and come
to the defence of our A^gument.

1. 1 Cor. 6 15. Howsoever the Treat: in the point of hearing of false
Prophets, is off, and on, so that no body by his words can well tell, what he
held; yet, as I have before showed, Page. 81. Gods Word damnes it utterly.

And to the former reasons, these may be added, 1, That the members of Christ,
and the members of Antichrist, must not bee mingled together, but in all the
points of Religious Communion, as Prayer, Prophecy, Preaching, andc. be
separated and apart. For to doe otherwise, is as great indignity offered to
God, as to take the members of the body, and make them the members of an
Harlot.

2. It Christ, who in those last days speaks evidently by his Gospel and
Spirit, had judged it fit, that his Children should go unto false Churches, he
would certainly have made known the same to them. Cirill observes that such of
the things done by Christ, are written, as the Writers thought to be sufficient
for manners and Doctrine. In Evang. Io. lib. 12. c. 68.

3. This seems much to eclipse the glory of Christs wisdom and faithfulness, in
providing for the full and perfect instruction of his people in his own
Ministry: That they should nevertheless (like an unchaste spouse) go out from,
and make use of a stranger. An honest man would bee ashamed to be seen to be
familiar with an Harlot.

Moreover, for the Learned, they are against all hearing of all false Prophets,
and speak down right, as the Word of God doth in the thing; I find in their
writings, no such false and idle distinction, as the Treat: devises; namely,
that some false Prophets may be heard; Others not.

As for the weaker sort Page. 17., and less able to discern of things that
differ: they must not hear them: but the stronger and wiser may. As this is the
idea of his own head, so for ought truly I know he walks alone in it. For, I am
sure, Calvin Sermon. against idol.. Musculus Comment. in Mat. 7. ver. 15., In
Mat 7. 15. Porous Comment. in Psal. 16, p. 52., Zanchy Explicat. in Philip. 3.
v. 1. p. 174 Tom. 4., Fenner interp. Son: ch; 1; v. 7, 8;, Palladius Postil;
Doom. 8. Post. Trin; p. 256;, the Rhemists Annot. in 2 Cor. 6. 14; and 2 Ioh.
10., the Douay- translators Notes on ps. 16; p. 56; and on 2 King: 5; p. 941;,
andc. those speak otherwise; yea, and some Elder Writers too. As Theodorus L.
4; c. 14., Chrisostome In Mat. 7, v. 15., Eusebius Lib. 4; c. 22., and others.

These say (as I before said) that no false Prophet is to be heard, by any
person whatsoever.

2. For those two Scriptures, Deu. 13. 1. 1 Ioh: 4. 1. here brougth, to prove
it Lawful, to hear unlawful Ministers: They are as fitly brought, as were the
two witnesses brought against Christ, to prove him a transgressor.

For 1. the hearing, mentioned in those places, respects only a true Church.

Again, it concerns no hearing of false Prophets; but the godly are there
admonished to examine the Doctrines delivered to the^ in a right way and order;
And if they find any by teaching to bee a false Prophet, they are to depose
him, and afterwards not to hear him again Populus Christianus detectis eorum
erroribus fidem non habeat, aures no praebeat, sed tanquam lupos fugiat. Par:
in Mat. 7. 15.; And thus our best Writers, interpret the places: as Frantzius
Imlerus, Orinaus, Danaeus, Bugenhagius, Selneccer, Hunnius, Oecolampadius, and
others.

Now, mark (good Reader) how this hangs together. If the Saints in a true
Church may hear one that is not known, to bee a false Prophet, but afterwards
by his unsound Doctrines plainly discovers himself so to be; Then may they go
unto a false Church, and hear one, whom they certainly know to be a false
Prophet before they go, andc. The expression of it is conviction enought. If it
be a fit thing to use a Touch-stone, for trial of coin, and that finding the
same false, to refuse it; then it is meet, to receive money known to us to be
counterfeit, and false. If this be absurd, so is the other too.

The Treat: goes thus foreword. 2. No mans unlawful outward calling, makes him
a false Prophet; Nor his outward lawful calling, a true; But his true or false
Doctrine only, makes him a true or false Prophet. A man may have a Lawful
Office of Ministry, and yet be a false Prophet: if he teach false Doctrine; so
he may be a true Prophet, if he teach the truth, though in unlawful and
Antichristian state of Ministry.

Ansvv. I never saw in my life, an error held by a man of learning, that hath
less brought to countenance it then this; For whereas others commonly doe quote
Scriptures (albeit ill applied) and allege for themselves the judgments of
other men. He goes not this way to work; But as if he had to deal only with
Papists; we must take (as they must the Popes Distinc. 40, c. 51. Papa.
Decrees) his will for a reason, and measure things by the rules of his breast.

But surely such kind of reasoning will have little weight in the conscience of
any truly fearing God. For they will be loath to leave an old faith for a new
fancy.

He saith, No mans unlawful outward calling, makes him a false Prophet; But J
say, it doth; And the Prophets Numb. 16. 2 Chro. 26. 1 King. 12. Son. 1 6. 7.
Jar. 14. 14. and 23. 21 and 27. 15, Christ Mat. 7. 13., and his Apostles Hob.
5. 4. Rev. 2. 2. say so too. Perkins Exposit. on Christs sermon: in the mou^t.
Mat. 7, v. 15. p. 239. vol. 3 is held among all the Godly Learned or a soled
and judicious Writer; Now, what his judgement herein was, hee shows it thus:
The first note which we must make of a false Prophet is this; Namely, to come
on his own head; and to preach not being sent; And by this mark are false
Prophets noted, Jar. 14. 14. I have not sent them, neither did J command them,
and yet they Prophesied in my name.

And no less doe these words of Christ import, they come unto you, that is of
themselves, without a calling from God and his Church, So he.

What he saith, is said of Hierom Comment. in Mat. 7. in Ier. 14. 14.,
Chrysostome g, Cyril in Mat. 7, Tom. 1., Porous Comment. in Mat. 7, 15., Luther
Enarrat. in Evang. Doom. Oct. Post. Trin: Tom. 5,, Pelargius Quaest. Evang. p.
97., Equines In Comment: in Ier: 14, 14., Corvinus Post: in Sexages. p. 54:,
Bullinger Comment: in Ier: 14. 14., Ferus in Io. 10, p. 239., Guiliaudus In
Ephes. 1, p. 292., Bugenhagius Comment: in Jar: 14, 14., Toletus In Jo: 10, p.
599., Topiar ^st: Doom: S, Post: Trin: p. 73., Hoffmister Homil. in Evang.
Doom. 9, post:, and others.

Again, if an unlawful outward calling, make an unlawful Minister; then it
makes a false Prophet; For according to the Scriptures, it is all one thing,
only expressed in sundry terms.

The Treat. @ Divine and More: Observe: page: 60. tells us that their sin is
great, and full of presumption, who shorten and strengthen the Scriptures to
make way for their own devises.

This fault he commits here himself; For where the Scriptures take all for
false Prophets, which are unlawful Ministers, he (to make way for his own
devise) will restrain the appellation to such as err only in Doctrine. And thus
he makes good the rule, which Logicians term de omni and de nullo, as if true
in the general, but not in the particular; As if true, that all unlawful
Ministers in the sense of the Scriptures, are false Prophets; yet such as are
unlawful Ministers in respect of their unlawful outward calling, are not false
Prophets.

Lastly, I would know, whether Corah burning true incense, and Ieroboams
Priests, offering true sacrifices, were false Prophets: if they were, (as no
rational man will deny,) then the other follows consequently.

But J guess what caused this error in the Treat: hee found in the Scriptures,
that some are false Prophets, because of their false Doctrines; Hence hee
concluded, there were no other false Prophets; But it follows not, unless a man
will say, he that robs a house, is a theife; Ergo, there are no thieves, but
House-Robbers. The which thing, whosoever holds, shall be Paralogizer, a
deluder of his own soul And this may serve for answer to the Pestle maker; who
enclosing up of his Epistle, crows out; Like a Cock of the game that hath
beaten all his fellows out of place, now let them tell us, where they find in
the Scripture, that men are named false Prophets, for want of a true outward
calling; Forsooth here we show it, if you have eyes to see it, and grace to use
it well..

Touching the other point; he speaks (^) in considerately, for to say, No mans
outward Lawful calling makes him a true Prophet; For as in Wedlock a woman is
truly a wife immediately upon the action of her Lawful marriage; yea though she
should afterword never doe the duties of a wife; So he is a true Ecclesiastical
Officer, incontinently upon his outward lawful calling, Let his practises
afterwards be good or bad; The reason is, because his administrations after his
calling, as prayer, preaching, andc. gives nothing to the formal being of it;
As I have showed else-where Necessity. Separ. p. 236..

His words following are: Treat. Balaam Number. 22 and 25. Iosh. 13. 21. 2 Pet
2, 15. 16. Rev. 2 14. Number. 25. 5. 9. 10, andc. And chap. 24. 2 3, andc. was
a false Prophet, in cursing (in purpose) where God would have him bless, and in
teaching Balak, to put a stumbling block before the people of Israel; and yet a
true Prophet in blessing Israel, by the spirit of Prophecy, and Word of the
Lord put into his mouth.

Answ. Would men receive his sayings, as they doe gould and silver, by due
trial and proof, they should find reason enought to refuse them, and turn them
back; Now, for the falseness of this Ea doceat Episcopus quae a Deo didicerit,
non ex proprio corde. Let the B. teach those things, which he hath learned of
God; And not of his own heart or fancy.. My answer to it, shall be in the words
of another man Attersol hist. of Barak and Balaam. on Numb. 22. p. 8 11.: We
know no mean between true Prophets and false, for whosoever is not a true
Prophet, is a false Prophet; and whosoever is a false Prophet, cannot be a true
Prophet of God. He that is of God, is a true Prophet; He that is of the Devil,
is a false Prophet; Neither doth the Mark this well, for it shows all the
Treat: answer to be caecum insomnium, a vain dream and nothing else. DELIVERY
AND UTTERANCE OF SOME TRUTH, MAKE HIM A TRUE PROPHET; For then the Devil should
be a true Prophet, who sometimes speaks the truth; albeit to a sinister end.
And a little after, he concludes thus: Balaam was a very Witch, a Wizard, a
false Prophet, a true sorcerer, famous or rather infamous, for his Devilish
Magic, which he practised among the wicked idolatrous Nation, So Attersol. And
many others write so too; As Iunius Anal Expli. Number. 22. p. 109., Symson
Exposit. on 2 Pet. 2; v. 16; p. 372., Ferus Comment in Numb. 22. Canutus ibid.;
and before them, Origin ibid., Greg Nazianzen ibid., Basil ibid..

Again, as hee writes against the truth; so against himself. For in Page. 70.
71. A Letter sent to London, written by the Treat. he saith, to name men
idolaters, adulterers, murderers, andc. because they doe some acts of idolatry,
murder, theift, andc. agrees neither with Christianity, nor civility, but is a
consequence and collection made without rule of Charity, Hierom: distinct. 36.
ca. fin. or ground of Truth. Yet see (aliud stants, aliud sedens,) How he is
one while for the thing, another while against it. Balaam delivers some truths:
Therefore he must be a true Prophet. But if another (cum Care Carizas) doe
reason after the same sort, hee calls it (and that rightly) a consequence made
without ground of truth. Testimonium tuum, quote alien re leave est, hoc
country re grave, andc Thine own testimony, which in another case is of small
weight, but this against thy self is of great moment. Tull.

3. Whereas Balaam in 2. Pet. 2. 16. is said to be a Prophet: the Apostle means
a false Prophet. And the like we read in other places 2 Kin. 3. 13. Hos. 9. 8.
See June. notes, on the place., not that the name (Prophet) is due to them; But
given them ironically, that is, because they falsely assume it Non quibus hoc
nomen vere congruebat, sed queen illud arroganter and falso sibi summebant.
Bright^. Comment. in Cant. Cant. cap. 4. foal. 78. and 16. T. W. Expos. upon
the Book of the Cantic. page. 18., glory in the title, and willingly would be
so reputed and taken. For the other Scriptures in the margin, I know not for
what end they were quoted, unless to show the reader, in how many places he may
find the word Balaam, in the Old and New Testament.

The Treat. goes on thus: He is a Prophet that speaks or declares a thing past,
present or to come. And to prophecy in our sense, is nothing else but to speak
to edification, exhortation and comfort. He that doth this is a true Prophet;
He that speaks the contrary, a false.

Answ. Men pleading for error, are driven oft times to use that kind of
reasoning, which in Schools they call fallacy ex ignorantione very Elenchi:
which is to change the state of the question, and to draw Conclusions contrary
to the true rules of the axioms, or propositions disputed off. The Treat. is
fallen into this fault: For whereas our question is only about hearing in
Church-way, and of Church-Officers; Hee alters quite the state of the point;
and speaks of hearing at large. As if we should question, whether Hearing
simply bee unlawful; and not rather hearing with certain adjuncts: That is, in
an Antichristian Church, of a false Minister, and the like.

But to come to his answer. 1. What it is to Prophecy in his sense The Trea.
wrote once that no Scripture justines preaching out of a true Church; much less
in a false Church; justificat: Separ: p. 73., I know not, neither doe I inquire
after. For it is sufficient for me to know what Prophecy is, and what true
Prophets are, in the sense of the Scriptures.

In the Book of God, I find true Prophets to be taken three ways. 1. Strictly,
for one, who from the inward counsel of God could foretell things to come Gen.
20. 17; Numb. 12 6; Deu. 18 55.. 2. For Lawful Pastors and Teachers in the
Churches of Christ Mat. 10. 41. 1 These. 5. 20; Rev 11, 6;. 3. And more
largely; For such private members 1 Cor. 14; Rome. 12. 6., of particular
Churches, as have received the gift of the interpretation of the Scriptures,
and so are able to speak to edification; exhortation and comfort. Of no other
true Prophets doe I read in all the Scripture: Seeing therefore the Priests he
pleads for, are not of any of these ranks Quae. in what rank of Prophets
unlawful Ministers are; And under what Scripture they are comprehended. I would
have a private Christian ask this question of some learned divine, whom hee
knows doth hold it lawful to hear false Ministers. And it is very likely he
will answer him by deep silence.: Then needs must they be false Prophets, and
so consequently not to bee heard.

2. Again in p. 77. He saith, No ma^ teached the Gospel, but was a member of a
true Church. For the other part of his answer; Which is, hee that teaches false
Doctrine, is a false Prophet. Here I think wee must take his meaning, and leave
his words; But what he means J know not; And therefore will cast it aside; only
here is a fit place to propound a question or two. 1 Whether to hold, teach,
and practice the errors and lies contained in their Canons, Service-Booke,
Books of Articles, and the Ordering of Bb. Priests and Deacons, doe make a
false Prophet. 2. Whether to hide from the people the knowledge of all the main
truths, which concern the outward regiment of Christs visible Church, make a
false Prophet. 3. Whether it bee Lawful to hear any false Prophet, known so to
be There is one question more, viz. whether the Lords Lawful Priests, which
served at the Altar in Jerusalem, mought not as well urge their people to hear
Ieroboams Priest at Dun and Bethel; As the Ministers now under the Gospel, to
persuade men, to hear in false Churches. If it bee not all one, show the
difference.. The simple beleeveth every word Pro. 14. 15.: But the prudent man
looks well to his going.

There is nothing more in this answer, but a little girding at some men's
persons, and at their exercise of Prophecy; to which J will say no more, but in
the Poets Iuvenal. Satyr. 2. words: Censure

SECT. 13.
THE 13. Objection is laid down in this manner: The Lords forbids Iudah going
to Gilgal, or to Bethel. Hos. 4. 15. 16.

Treat: The meaning is plain, and the words express, that they were not to go
thither to offend and play the Harlot, in joining to idols, Ver. 15. 16. This I
grant Nos queen Christiano nominee gaudemus dicemus nos abjicere Deos alienos,
and verum colere, cum pars idol defendat, adoret, colat, breviter divines
honoribus pro sequatur. Lever. in Josh. c. 24 Home. 71. p foal. 81. is to be
done in no place. But deny any such thing to be done in the hearing by me
pleaded for; The Scriptures every where forbid the going, or coming to such
places, or persons, as in, by, or with them some evil is done, to wit, for the
doing of any thing evil, or unlawful in, or with them. This is all a primo ad
ultimum.

Ansvv. When Children find any hard words in their Lesson; They will be sure to
pass them quickly over; Hoping thereby to save themselves. I must needs say,
the Treat. met here with a strong argument; And therefore it is no wonder,
though he show us a Scholars trick: To wit, leave that speedily, the which hee
knew not how to answer See the like answer to our 1. Object. It is Antonies
precept in Tulle, if men be troubled about a hard question, to say nothing to
it. De Orate. l. 2.. If the Reader doe not see the weakness of it (to say the
best of it) I will set before him a glass to view it in.

For 1. He makes himself here an Opposite to science. 2. To Conscience. 3. To
the truth; And lastly, to himself. And first of the first: They were nor (
saith he) to go thither to offend. J profess in all good conscience, my desire
is not to pervert his meaning, but to understand it; But how to understand it,
J know not; For his speech is much like the answer, which Pythius the Priest
gave to Pyrrhus the King Epire. Cicer. de divine.

and discrepant, as it cannot be gathered from it, whether He, or the Romans
should overcome. The Treat: answer is of the like ambiguity and darkness; It is
an ^, as the Philosopher Arrest. 1 Seph. 4., speaks; For you cannot directly
say, whether hee intends that Iudah might Law^ully hear Ieroboams Priests at
Dan and Bethell, or not. You may take it either way, or no way; For it is
(utroque nutans sententia) a speech like an Echo, and will say whatsoever you
will say before it.

But it is no marvel, Hoc neque prophetae predicaverunt, neque Dominus docuit
neque Apostoli tradiderunt. Iren. l. 1. c. 1. though hee leaves the matter thus
in a doubtful sense. For I believe what Augustine Liberius improbare non audio.
ad Ian. Epist. 119. saith of himself, was here true in the Treat: hee durst not
freely speak his judgement.

But in the mean time, this shows a wretched cause; For whosoever sees his
cause to be good, hee will search and weigh rather what should be said plainly
and to the full: then what may be said darkly and coulorable, and so to put it
off with a shift.

2. If he meant to say any thing, his meaning then must needs be: that it was
lawful for Judah to hear the Doctrines of the Law Preached at Dan and Bethell
by Ieroboams Priests. The which expositio^ is an unsufferable perverting of the
Text Sua si docere velint, nolite audire, nolite facire; certe enim tales sua
quaerunt, non quae Iesu Christi. August. in Iohan: Tract. 46., and leads unto
great impiety; For to distinguish things in such a sort, is for all the World,
as if one should say, the Law of God forbids adultery; True, but how? To
satisfy lust, not to begit Children, as Sejanus did Tacit. Anal: Lib. 4..

Again, the Law of God forbids perjury, as how? As it tends to the shedding of
innocent blood, but not to accommodate a friend, as Cicero merrily speaks of
Clunius Pro Q. Rassio Comaed.. I could multiply instances this way of the same
nature with his exposition: The Lord saith expressly, go not to Gilgal. But how
say our Opposites; As to Offer Sacrifices; but not to go thither to hear the
Doctrines of the Law preached by the Priests of Jeroboam. Is not this horrible
presumption to contradict Sua si docere velint, nolite audire, nolite facire;
certe enim tales sua quaerunt, non quae Iesu Christi. August. in Iohan: Tract.
46. the plain Word of God?

For to establish their own inventions: What Heresy held by any Heretic, may
not by such bold distinctions be justified. I may say as a Learned man saith
Verb sine crimimine sunt, sensus in crimine.: The words are without fault, the
sense is in fault.

Of this corrupt handeling of the Scriptures, Bucer Impium esse, verb Christi
ultra propositum materiam extrahere. de regno Christi, l. 2. c. 29. p. 149.
writes judiciously, Hilari: de Trinit: lib. 2. and shows what a wicked thing it
is, to apply the Word of God, beyond the proposed matter. If it be an unjust
thing (saith he) to stretch the Doctrines and answers of a wise and pruaent
man, beyond the matter and question unto which they are given; But specially to
apply them to the thing which he intends not, neither doth it agree withal;
Then much more is it, a vile thing to abuse the Doctrines and precepts of
Christ in such a manner, andc.

Of such as doe so, that fitly may be said, what Hierom Rhetius eloquence
quidem est, sed ineptus enterprise. Hieren. ad Marcellam: saith of one
Rheticius, they may be wise men, but are foolish interpreters.

3. If the Prophets had so meant (as the Treat: closely insinuates, but durst
not, it seems speak it out,) viz. that the Hearing of the Word preached by
Ieroboams Priests at Bethell, Dan and G^lgal, (able to open and apply the
Doctrines of faith by that Church professed) both Lawful, and in cases
necessary for all, andc. They could easily have expressed it We ought not so
much, as to know the things, which the Book of the Law conteyneth not. Hilai:
in Psal. 132. The Scripture denies it what it notes not. Tertull. Lib, de
Monog.; For they were filled with Spirit of God in all wisdom and Spiritual
understanding; But the truth is, in plain expressions, they speak the contrary.
And unless men's minds be overcast in like sort, as were the eyes of Elymas,
they cannot but see it.

But to press them down with authority, for the preventing of error in the
simple, and for caveling in such as desire to contend. We will here set down
the judgement of the most Learned, touching this thing. The Prophet (saith
Zanchy Comment. in Hos: 4, 15. p. 82.) saith not Sacrifice not at Bethel and
Gilgal, but simply and plainly com ye not thither, noting that they were
interdicted not only from sacrificing there; BUT JNDEED THAT THEY SHOULD NOT
THITHER COME AT ALL. Rivetus In Hos. 4. p. 156. understands it of such a
keeping away: As that they might not be bodily present at any spiritual
exercise there performed. So Calvin Praelect. in Hos. 4. p. 52. Porous In Hos.
4. v. 14. p. 504. Tom. 4., Oecolampadius In Esa. 2. l. 1. foal. 20., Lyra In
Amo. 4. 4., Brocardus In Levit. 10. page. 69., Luther In Amo. 4., Brentius In
Amo. 4., Fabritius In Hos. 4., Mollerus In Hos. 4., Osorius In Hos. 4.,
Shaddaeus In Amo. 4., Sedelius In Amo. 4., Cramerus In Hos. 4. 15., and others.

Moreover, of the same judgement are the Jew Rabbis, as Mercer ibid: notes. He
that desires to see more, let him read what the Lovanists Annot. in August.
Brevic. Collat. cum Donatist: Collat. dici. 3. c. 9. And Annot. in August:
Post: Collation: ad Donatist: c. 20., have written about it.

4. If we may not come, to such places, or persons, for the doing of any evil
and unlawful thing with them, then I conclude from his own mouth, that the
practice he pleads for, is sinful; And so I have already manifested unto all
men, except some men will contend without cause, and against reason, out of a
Spirit of contention and contradiction.

SECT. 14.
OUR 14. Objection is thus framed: They that eat of the Sacrifice, partake of
the Altar, 1 Cor. 10. 18. So they that receive the Word, from an unlawful
Officer, partake with his Office.

To which he thus answers: Treat. I deny the consequence A Child can say so
much, but hee had need be no Child that shall prove so much:. The Office is not
to the Word, as the Altar is to the Sacrifice. The Altar makes the thing to be
offered actually to become a sacrifice, which it was not before, save only in
destination; as Christ plainly teaches: saying the Altar sanctifieth the gift.
But so doth not the Office make that to become the Word of God, which was not
so actually before.

There goes a story amo^g Scholars of AEsops deceiving Mercury: He having
promised him one part of his Nuts, keeps all the meat to himself, and delivers
the shells to the other. As the Treat: gives us here but half of the Argument,
so that half, is only the bark or outside. For had he laid it down (unum ad
unum) according to the scope of the place, and as we apply it, thus it should
have been.

Such as did eat of the sacrificed flesh, taken off from the Altar under the
Law, approved of the Jewish worship Par. Comment. in 1 Cor. 10. ver. 15 18, and
showed themselves to be of the same Religion Calv. in 1 Cor. 10. 18., Again,
they which went unto the idol-Temples, and did there eat of the Heathen
Sacrifices, joined themselves by this outward act to that society and
superstition, So by just consequence, whosoever goes unto false Churches, to
eat spiritually of any of the Sacrifices there administered, in and by an
Antichristian state of Ministry; Hee justifies Guiliad. Comment. in 1 Cor. 10,
18. by his going, their idolatrous Church, Ministry worship, andc. and makes
himself a will-worshipper with the rest; according to Pals Doctrine in the
former Examples. See the Rhemist. on the place.

How they will chop this argument small, that they may the easier swallow it, I
know not? But this I am sure off; they cannot press it down with divine
authority Auserantur de motion, quae adversus nes invicem, non ex divines
Canonises libris, sed aliunde recitamus. August. de unita: Eccles. cont.
Petilian. c. 3.. But either they must verb dare, as they speak: and use technas
peiseis, uncunning proofs: Or acknowledge it to be a truth, as in truth it is.

To come to his answer, which is like a faggot of thorns, full of prickles,
bound up with straw, the which by the fire of Gods Word is quickly burned. 1.
He applies things here (aschematiston) very ilfavoredlie. The Office (saith
hee) doth not make that to become the Word of God, which was not so actually
before. True; Neither did the Altar make the thing to be offered, to become
that which it was not so actually before; For we know, before it was laid upon
the Altar, it was flesh, but afterwards it became a Sacrifice. The same is true
concerning the Word; For howsoever the Office makes it not to become the word
of God: (as neither did the Altar make the thing to be offered to become flesh)
yet by the Office it is made a Church-sacrifice, the which it was not so
before. Daverba and decive nerves Persius Sat: 4.

And here I desire the Reader to observe, how disorderly he sets things down.
The Altar makes the thing to be Offered, actually to become a sacrifice, which
it was not before.

But so doth not the Office make that to become the Word of God, which was not
so actually before.

and What Child may not see the absurdity of it? For all that hee could
conclude from the first assertion; unless he would conclude nothing; was either
thus: The Office makes the Word of God to become a Church-sacrifice, which it
was not before, but in destination; Or thus: The Office makes not the Word of
God to become a Church sacrifice, for it was so before This latter howsoever it
be void of truth, yet there would have been some sense in it. Doe not think
that the Treat. wrote this Elenchum sophisticu^ ignora^tly, but rather fore-saw
what inconvenie^ce would foal low, if he should let the argument run out
orderly and proportionably. I believe hee saw well enought, should he grant,
that the Office makes the word to become a Ministerial Church-Sacrifice; This
Scripture would stand in force against the thing they pleaded for.

2. For the place of Scripture, Mat. 23. 19. the meaning is: As they had
erected an Altar, and dedicated it to the Lord, according to his appointment,
whereon to offer Sacrifices; So the things offered to God on it, and by it,
were after a sort sanctified by the Altar (f); That is, it made them public
Church-services, acceptable to the Lord. And the same is true of Christs
Ministry; As it is a divine institution, given unto the Church, for the
performance of Holy things, so it sanctifies the things, that is, makes them to
become Lawful Ministerial Church-Ordinances, without which they were not so;
Neither could they be so reputed.

And this may be as applied also to a false Ministry; For as it is an
institution of Satan and Antichrist, to have their wicked devises administered;
So it defiles every administration, done in it, and by it; And for the
administrations, they are all false, unlawful, Antichristian Church-actions, @
Quamvis Dei solius sit sanctificare; tamen aliquo modo quae principalius Deo
sunt-consecrata, ad se pertinentia, sanctificare dicuntur. Muscul. in Evang.
Mat. c. 23 p. 477. Tom. 3. offered to the Devil Hoc est judicium Dei de quavis
cultu and de de quavis Religion, quem non secundum verbum eius exercetur: Non
Deo sed demonijs prestatur. Pare. Com. in 1 Cor. 10. 20. Finger enim falsum
cultum, est falsum Deum finger; queen tunc fingitur false Dei voluntas, and sic
falsus Deus. Par. in 1. Cor. 10. 7., and otherwise to be taken.

3. Where he saith, the eating of the Sacrifices in Israel became their
Sacraments, and the Heathen sacrifices were their Sacraments: Howsoever, were
this so, it neither hurts us, nor helps him. Yet I cannot see how it can be so
applied. For 1. Circumcision and the passeover were Israels Sacraments; And
therefore by Altar, their whole Religion and Worship is understood. As Zanchy
Altar pro tota religion and cultu accipitur. praecept. 3 p. 534. truly
observes.

Again, the Apostle prohibiteth not only the eating of the Heathen Sacraments,
but all going to their Temples, to doe any thing there, with them, or among
them; Yea, though it were not with any intent to perform a Religious Action. So
Respicit congressus andc. Comment. in Psul. 16. p^g. 53. Rivetus.

4. As meats considered in themselves, may Lawfully be eaten any where, if it
be done without the offence of the weak, as Paul Teaches at large, 1 Cor. 10 25
29. Yet if meats bee considered as they are offered to idols, and eaten in the
Idol^Temples in the honour of idols, See his justificat. of sep. 94. they be
unlawful. The like may be said of the word, if we consider it in it self, the
same may be preached Lawfully any where; But if the Word be considered, as
Antichrist uses it, Distingue tempora and locus and reconciliabis scriptures.
or rather abuses it, in setting up a false Church and Ministry, to teach it in,
and by; In this respect the Word is not Lawfully preached; How oever here again
he insinuates the contrary. Distinguish (saith Augustine k) times and places,
and thou shalt reconcile the Scriptures.

Lastly, J desire the Reader to make it well: Howsoever the Treat. hath said
something, yet nothing at all to the Objection: For he should have proved, that
howsoever, they who did eat of the sacrificed Beasts of the Altar, justified
the Altar: And they which went to idol-Temples, honoured the idol; Yet now wee
may Lawfully take and eat the spiritual sacrifices, which come off from the
Altar of false Churches, and false Ministeries; And yet not justify the Altar,
nor give any honour or consent thereto; No nor any show or appearance thereof
Quae: Whether such as pretend to ground their practice of hearing on this
Treatise: doe not show either lightness in not weighing what is said: Or
ignorance in not discerning what they read: or wilfulness, in doing a thing,
for some by respect, pretending this Book as a Cloak for it. Hic labour hoc
opus est.

But it may be, we shall hear hereafter of some other, that will say something
to it; In the mean time we will wait for it, and proceed to the rest.

SECT. 15.
THE 15. Objection we have thus framed: The places called Temples and Churches,
having been built for idolatry, should be abolished; And therefore are not to
bee frequented, specially being accounted and made holy place, Deu. 12. 1.

Ans. What is said of some men's Sermons, I may say of the Treat: answer here,
the matter had been much better, if he had named no Text; For he touches not
the Objection at all; which is concerning Antichristian Temples, in the
unlawful use of them, but of the Lawful Worship of God, in those places, from
whence the idols and idolatries are removed. Now, howsoever J purpose not to
speak of those material places, in regard our exception lies rather against
their false Constitution, not of stones, but of people, yet this I doe affirm,
that as the idol-Temple in the use of Antichrists idolatrous worship, is a part
of his false worship Page^. Arrow. ag. separate. page. 173.: So they doe
pollute in the use of such worships, as are practised in them. And that they
should be destroyed, having been corrupted with idolatry, there are many
Examples for it. Guagninus de Lituania Casstod. lib. 3. hist. Tripart. l. 9.
Sozom. l. 5. Theodorit. l. 3. and l. 5 c. 20. 37. Euseb. de vit. Constable.
lib. 5. c. 53 Socrat. l. 1 c. 14. August. de Civ. Dei, l. 18. c. 54. Cranz.
Saxon. c. 9. and 12. Helmoldus in Sclaevorum Chron. 11. Cent. l. 2. c. 9.
Cramer l. 15.

But to let these things pass, if we may have leave to put down our own
argument, it shall be thus.

If the false Churches of whom we dispute They hold as we doe, that the Church,
Ministry, Worship, and Government of the Church of England, is Antichristian
and false, so that our difference is not, whether these things are so, but
being granted on both sides, they are so: The question is, whether we may
Lawfully hear there or no. be that spiritual Babilon, mentioned in Revel. 18.
4. Then it is not Lawful for Gods people to go unto them, to perform any
spiritual or Religious action; and so consequently not to hear there.

But the first is true; Ergo the later is true also.

The Proposition needs no proof, because our Opposites and we herein are of
opinion alike.

The Assumption is manifest by these reason. 1. The words in the Text prove it
plainly: Come out of her my people; That is, remove your selves from all false
Assemblies, covenant together to walk in all the ways of God, serve the Lord
among your selves in ^pirit and truth, and return not from whence you are come.
But repent rather that ye have suffered your consciences to be wrought upon by
any unlawful Offices. And thus doe they Learned interpret the place; namely, of
such a coming out, as that we may not be bodily present at any of their worship
Artopaeus in Rev. 18. p. 198. Place. Illyric. in Rev. 18 4.: No quidem
spectatum, saith Pare^s Comment. in Hos. 4. page. 506. Tom. 1. no not so much
as to behold it. Bullinger In Apocal. cap. 18. Concio 77. p. 241. in his
Exposition saith, we must fly from their Temples, and not enter afterwards into
them to doe any spiritual worship. So Rupertus, Theophanes, Lambertus,
Winckelmanus, Wirth, Camerarius Ribera, Leoninus, Conradus Brocardus, Capella,
and others.

2. Seeing a devised Constitution, is an idol, all that comes from it, is
taunted 2 Cor 6. 1. Ioh. 5. 21 Zach. 11. 17. with the idolatry of that
Constitution; and therefore not to be touched, because they are unclean things:
A false Church-state, is rightly likened Botsac. Promp: Allegor. c. 21. de
Minisi., to the Leprosy spread in the walls of the houses of the Lepers,
because of the pollution It is like that filthy Bird, which carries this motto,
contactu omnia ^oedat., which it causes to persons and things. Take for
instance a city or town; If the civil state or corporation, which they have,
bee usurped, devised, or derived from a false power, all their public
administrations are unlawful, and every one partaking thereof, offends; So all
administrations done in a false Church, (whether prayer, preaching Sacraments,
Censures, andc.) are unclean actions, and doe defile every receiver; I say,
because of the idol-state, which is devised out of mans brain, and used as a
means to serve God in it and by it.

As poison is carried from the fountain to the Cistern, and from the root to
the branches; So from a false Constitution, (as from a poisoned fountain and
root,) a spiritual poison is carried and conveyed into every one of her
administrations. Nature teaches this, where generation is betwixt ^ of one
kind, the like doth ever bring forth the like; Neither can a Sheep bring sorth
a Wolf, nor a Wolf a Sheep* but one nature is ever common to the breeders and
to the brood.

This holds true in the cause of a spiritual Harlot, as she is a viperous body,
so she begets a brood of vipers: I say all the ordinances, done after the
invention and will of Antichrist, can no other wise be judged ^hen a brood
common to the nature of the breeders, that is the Devil and the Whore of Rome,
the Father and Mother that begat them.

3. Because the Lord hath not promised to them, his presence and acceptance;
what the Lord may accept, or will, we dispute not: Only this I say, whoseoever
hears in a false Church, cannot by any promise that he hath in the Word of God,
expect Gods blessing on that which he doth; The reason is, because a true
constitution of a Church, that is, where men are gathered together, according
to the Gospel of Christ, is that only Lawful Religious society, or Communlon of
Saints, wherein God will be honoured, whereby he will be served, and whereto he
hath promised his presence and acceptance; So then, howsoever we are not bound
unto hearing in a true Church, necessitate medij, as if Gods grace were tied to
the means this way; Yet as they say in Schools, necessitate praecepti, if we
consider Gods Commandment, so wee are bound to Church hearing, only in a true
Church, and in no other Church can we expect Gods presence, promise and
acceptance.

4. Lots flying from Sodomy, and Israels departure out of Egypt and Babilon,
shadowed out Bulling. in Apocal. 18. Con. 78. Ciril in Esa. c. 48. l. 5. Tom.
Zwinplius Comment. in ler. c. 51. Chytraeus in Apoc. c. 18. our coming out from
Antichristian Assemblies; Now they came off wholly and fully; And were not one
while out, and another while in again. But made an entire and constant
separation.

That this may accord with the thing tipified; we must come quite away from
Sodomy, Egypt, and Babilon spiritual. Not come near the door of the Harlots
Pro. 5. 2. 8, and Chap. 7. 24. 25. house, nor eat of her Offerings; as the wise
man speaks. We must not be one part of the day before the Lord in Zion, and the
other part at Dan and Bethell, worshipping before the Calves. As the Manner of
some is Componistae ergo, and temperature vel ferruminatio eorum Deo ita
disciplined, ut fasti lium ei ingenerant, abominationi sint, and abdicate eos.
Bulling: Com: in Apocal. c. 3. Con. 20. page. 57. I speak it to their shame.

5 In hearing there, men doe countenance, that false-state: As he that receives
stole^ goods of a theife justifies him: so Pro. 17 15. andc. 6. It is a strong
presumption they are not Gods people: Rev. 18. 4. specially when they stay in
Babilon after many warnings to come out. 7. Such as will not leave Babilons
sins, must look for her plagues and judgements. Forbes in Rev. 14 p. 135

And so saith the Treat. Manumiss: to a Menu: page. 4. The authority of
Ministers in their Parochial Parishes, may not be by Gods people partaken with,
(no not in actions otherwise Lawful) under the pains of Babilons plagues.

Before I end this Section, it will not be amiss, to examine what our Opposites
doe say, being pressed with the authority of this Scripture.

Their plea is that which the Treat. Page. 3. and 64. hath taught them, viz: So
they sequester and withdraw themselves from all Communion. with the
Hierarchical Order of Church Government and Ministry, there established, they
may Lawfully hear, and are come out of Babilon so far as the Lord requires.

Ansvv. 1. They have no reason for all this they say, nor authority but their
own.

2. What they say, is a gross contradiction, and mere nonsense; For it is, for
all the World, as if one should say. Be thou joined to an Harlot, and be not
joined; Be ye partakers of other men's sins, and be not; Have no fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness, and yet have. Magna inter molles
consortia; This and theirs is all one: Withdraw your selves from the
Hisrarchicall Order and Ministry, and yet hear: As if men in hearing are not so
far from withdrawing fro^ the Hierarchical Order and Ministry, that by the
verse action they join themselves to it, are partakers of it, and have
fellowship with it; As I have before showed and proved. What deceiver ever
taught men to commit sin in plain expression, that it was so; But rather under
terms of the contrary persuaded them to it. Nicolaitas contagia, cultus
idolorum, scortationes, adultery and omnes libidines, pro adiophois habuisse.
Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 29 Iranian. l ^* c. 27.

3. Such distinctions as these are the wiles of Iesuits, (q) D. Rain. de
idolat. p. 348. as some Learned Men have well observed. Yea the truth is, out
of this quiver all Heretics draw their arrows. For let a Familist bee pressed
with such Scriptures as these. Fly idolatry, keep your selves from idols, andc.
How will he answer? By a distinction To uphold the Heresies of H. N. this is
one special and principal practice, that the history and native sense of the
Word of God is altogether neglected of him, and in steed thereof, is
entertained an allegorical and bastar lie construction, foolish and fond
distinctions, which thing utterly defaces the certainty of the sacred
Scripture, and makes no other thing of it, the^ a nose wax. J. knew stub
against the heresies of H. N. p. 61, the body is not meant, but the mind only;
When we allege to our Opposites, Rev. 18. 4. Come out of her my people, what is
their answer? by the same distinction, to come out from hearing it is not
meant, but this and that, and I know not what. Behold here how they reason
alike, and resemble those two, of whom the Poet speaks: Alter in alterius
jactantes lumina vultus.
One looking asset were babies in another eyes.


4. This is to gratify the error of Montanus Discipuli Montani dicunt
paracletum plura in Montano dixisse, quam Christum in Evangelio protulisse: Nec
tantum plura, sed etiam meliora atque majora. Epipha: lib. 1. Haere. 27.
Tentull: de praescript., who professed, that he knew more then the Apostles.
Now, I am sure John the Disciple whom Iesus loved, knew nothing of this
distinction; to weet, how to come out of Babilon, in one respect, and yet in
another to stay there still; For, had he known it, surely he would have taught
it; specially it being such a weighty point, as (saith the Treat:) is both
Lawful, and upon occasion necessary for all of all Sects and sorts of
Christians.

Were our Opposites of that Company, who are called by the name of Apostles, I
should think that they thought themselves to be some new Apostles indeed.

5. When the words of a Text are plain, agree with the circumstances of the
place, with the Analogy of saith, and with other Scriptures; For men then, to
leave the native sense, and to force a sense contrary to that which the letter
expresses, It is (^, to wrest the Scriptures, and not to expound them by the
true rules and Canons of Divinity. 2 Pet. 3. 6. So Augustine Lib. 2. de Doct.
Christ. c. 31., Hieron. Comment. in Am. 4., Keckerman Rat. Eccles. l. 1.,
Perkins Prophetia c, 2. de modis inter pretend., and others.

But so doe these men, For whereas this Scripture speaks of leaving all the
administrations in false Churches. And this well agrees with the scope and
drift of the place, with the rules of faith, and with other Scriptures;
Notwithstanding against the literal sense, they peremptory say, that me^ must
not leave all the administrations in false Churches; But hear there
Antichristian Ministers; how be it, this is no more expressed, then their
Sacraments, or Service-Booke. Queer. Why a Familist using the liberty and
boldness that these men doe, may not say, and prove it as well, that there is
not coming out of the outward man here mea^t at all

6. As their distinction is untrue, so it is also new; For we find no such
Doctrine in other men's writings; whether Calvinists Par. in Rev. 18. 4,
Lutherans Brent. in Exeges. Ioh. 4., Papists Doway Transl. in Psal. 26. p. 56..
Besides the martyrs Page. 93, first and last would not receive it, least to
save their lives, they should lose their souls. It was the answer of Fredrick
the Duke of Saxonie. Who being prisoner to Charles 5. was promised releasement
and restitution of dignity, if he would go to the false Church; Summum in
terris Dominum agnosco Caesarem: in Coelis Deum. I am ready to yield to the
Emperor in civil accommodations; But in Heavenly things I acknowledge but one
Master. Christ is more welcome to me in bonds, then Caesars honour without
Christ. The like did the Prince of Condee; yea the zeal of Q: Marie may condemn
our Opposites; For she would not hear B: Ridlies Sermon, because she thought he
was no Lawful Minister.

I remember what Diogenes At malo inquit sal Athinis lingere, quam Craternm
frui magnifice instruct manse. Diog. Laret. invit. Diog. lib. 6 c. 2. said to
Craterus, one of Alexanders chief Captains, who being a man of great wealth,
invited the Philosopher, to abide with him, promising him great entertainment;
Sleet. But he replied that he had rather lick salt in Athens, then fare
delicately with Craterus. Preferring liberty, albeit accompanied with poverty,
before the delicates of rich men, where freedom is diminished. This we may
apply to all upright men, they will more esteem of the means, which they find
in Gods way, and which they may enjoy with liberty of conscience: (how little
soever it be, and what afflictions soever accompany it.) Then the the large
entertainment, which false Ministers promise them in the ways of Antichrist,
unto the enslaving of their consciences, and losing of that precious liberty,
which Christ hath purchased for them with his own blood.

SECT. 16.
OUR last Objection is laid down thus: Seeing whatsoever is not of faith is
sin, what word of God, and so of faith, is there for this practise.

To which he thus replies: Treat. Every Scripture that either commands the
hearing of Gods Word, Mat. 7, 24. Luck. 11, 28. or promises a blessing to them
that hear and keep it; Or that commands me to edify and build up my self: To
obey the Magistrate; or to follow after peace; 1 Pet. 2, 5 Or to prevent
offences; warrants, and in cases enjoyns this practice. Tit. 3, 1, Hob. 12, 14.

Answ. He that can make anything of this answer, I will say of him, as they say
of the Pope Papa ex nihilo potest facere aliquid. Extra. de Translation
Episcopi quanto in Gloss. Axed. de concess: praebendae proposuit: in Gloss:; Of
nothing he can make something. For indeed it is as frothy and unsoled a speech,
as can be expressed. And if it carry any force with it, 1 Cor. 10, 32. the
frame must stand thus: If the Scriptures command the hearing of Gods Word,
promise them a blessing which keep it; Command men to obey the Magistrate;
follow after peace, prevent offences; Then they warrant and enjoin them to hear
unlawful Ministers in false Churches. (In eodem haesitat luto.) It is either
thus, or it is nothing.

He reasoned here like one whom I well knew, who having accused another,
alleged 2. or 3. Sentences of Scriptures, for to prove his chardge; Now all men
know, that the Scriptures could not testify and witness, that the person had so
said or done; But only condemned such a fact, if it had been proved.

To as good purpose is this answer; He saith the Word of God commands us to
edify our selves, obey the Magistrate, follow after peace, andc. And hence very
handsomely concludes, that the Word warrants this practice. He might have cited
all the precepts in the old and new Testament, and from every one of them, as
wisely have inferred this practice.

But the Reader needs not wonder to see the Scriptures so alleged, for the
truth is, either our Opposites must so apply them; Or leave them out;
Considering there are not any authentical records of the Holy Ghost, neither
any inevitable consequence grounded upon the same, to be produced for the
justification of this practice. As for the 3. first precepts: (viz. the Hearing
of the Word, with a promise of Gods blessing to it, and how wee are to be
edified:) J have already spoken off; And therefore doe now pass them by.

To answer the other places: 1. He saith, Our obedience to the Magistrates doth
warrant and enjoin this practice.

I answer, we are not (throught Gods mercy) so ignorant of our duty this way;
But we know wherein our obedience concisteth, and how it is to be limited in
things Lawful Parr. Exposit. on Rome. 13. v. 1. p. 6. and not contrary to the
Word of God. As for the Oath of our Allegiance Cartw. Home. in Eccles. c. 8
foal. 195, 166. to them, it binds us not simply, but in the Lord; For we are
entered so strictly into a Covenant with God, as no authority of Man or Angel
can break it. Obligatio haec tam erst est, ut nullius creature imperio posit
ullo modo solve. Am: de consc. lib. 1 c. 3; p. 6.

Now, we are sure it is against Gods Law, that Magistrates either of themselves
or by others, should devise false ways Bucer de regno Christ. lib. 1, c. 1, 2,
3. Martyr. in Judge. 19., as Churches, Ministeries, Worship, Discipline, andc.
For to serve Iesus Christ in, and by them. But say they doe? We say then wee
must not give any approbation Bast. Castalion Annot. in 1 Cor. 8., honour, or
allowance unto them; No not so much as with our outward presence and bodily
gesture: For as their institutions are real and substantial idols, so they are
by bodily presence and outward gestures 3. ways honoured and reverenced.
Genuflection, capitis apertione, and corporis inclination. By kneeling on the
knee, uncovering of, the head, and bowing of the body Zanch. de rede^pt. lib.
1. p. 401.

To be short, this our refusing to doe their unlawful commands, is no
disobedience at all perkins Comment. on Hob. 11 v. 23. Porous Comment. in Hos.
5, page. 514. Tom. 1. Taylor on Tit. 3. p. 549., because the fifth Commandment,
in this case cease to bind, and gives place to the Commandments of the first
Table which are greater. Some Papists are so reasonable in this thing, as they
say the Pope is no further to bee obeyed and followed, then it may be done
without sin. So Felinus De Rescriptis: Si quando ver: sed nunquid. Hostiensis
De Concess: praebend. proposuit., Alphonsus de Castro Adverse. hoeres. lib. 1,
c. 7., and others. A reason for it is given by Ambrose Comment. in 1 Cor. 7:
They are the slaves of men, that make themselves subject to men's
superstitions.

2. He saith, Every Scripture that commands them to follow after peace,
warranted and enjoynoth this practice.

Answ. Our concord and unity with men, must be held, (usque ad aras,) not in
error and sin, but in truth and goodness Parr: Expos. on Rome. 15. 6. p. 250.
For if it be otherwise, it is no peace but war Orig. in Rome. 15. 5. Cyprian de
lapses Sermon. 5.; Yea a mutual conspiracy against Christ. I confess, the name
of peace Cicer. Philippe. 12., is sweet, the thing it self both pleasant and
desirable. But this is when it is with Purity and Holiness Zach. 8, 19. Rome.
15. 4 Hob. 12. 14. Chrysost. Home. 30. in Hob. 12, Tom. 3 p. 64. nihil laeden
pietatem, according to piety, and in the Lord. If peace should be made (as the
Treat: here would have it) with Antichrist and his adherents, that is, to
worship God, in, with, and by their false Church and Ministry, it would be like
the peace with Antonie Cicer. Philippe. 12. and his Mates, that is not a peace,
but an agreement of slavery to them; Yea truly of great impiety. Wherefore as
Agamemnon (in a Greek Poet Eurip: Iphigen. in aulid. did answer his Brother, of
whom he was requested to show himself a brother, in giving his co^sent to a
wicked act. So doe J answer the Treat my Brother, who would have me to join
with others in the fellowship of false Churches and Ministers.

^.
My wits with thee J would retain,
But mad to be I doe not mean. Melancth. in Rome. 14.
3. For this place, 1 Cor. 10, 32. which speaks of the preventing of scandals;
It is as fitly brought, as if a man defending adultery, should bring for it,
the words of the 7. Commandment, Thou shalt not committ adultery. For what is
more directly against the thing he pleads for then it, if we consider the many
offences which are caused by it; And that the Reader may see how forcibly the
place is, to overthrow his own cause. I will speak here little touching
offences.

The word ^ in Greek, hath the signification * of breaking a Rule, Order, or
institution. In Hebrew it is named Micesol of halting, or causing another to
trip or fall by something cast in his way. The Child Takul, and Sireak
Cheshela, is of the like derivation.

In the Arabian tongue the word is Shush so named of unsettling another. In
propriety of speech, it signifies the crooked piece in a trap, to which the
bait is tied; at which a Mouse, Rat, Wolf, or any other vermin biting, the trip
falls down and catches the beast.

According to Tertullian, a scandal is Example of a thing not good, but evil,
leading or emboldening unto sin. Or thus it may be: It is a Word or deed,
either evil in it self, or in appearance giving occasion of falling to others.
Daven. Quaest. 7. p. 40. Equine. 2. Qu 43.

Again, Touching offences, they are given 10. ways. 1. When false Worship is
practised Eze. 23 33. Pelarg Quaest. Evang. in Mat. 18. p. 205. polan. Syntag.
Theol. l. 6, c. 3. p. 339.. 2. Bad counsel given Mat. 23, 22. Hunnius in Mat.
c. 18. p. 606. Melancth. in Evang. fest. 5. Mesh. p. 552.. 3. Weak Christians
caused to go a stray Willet. on Rome. 14. Quaest. 3. p. 641.. 4. The stronger
greeved Eckius Home. fest. Mesh. p. 700. Tom. 5.. 5. Evil men hardened in sin
Zanch: prae: 3; p. 539. Aret: in Mat: 18; p: 643. 6. New opinions broached
Porous in Rome: 14 v. 13; p: 173. 7. The Gospel caused to be evil spoken off
Eze: 36 Cent: 1, l: 2; c. 4; p: 448:. 8. Our duties neglected to the Brethren
Ames de Consc: l. 5; c. 11; p: 286, 287; Chrisost: in 2 Doom: advent: p: 309.
To^ 6. 9. Ill Example showed August; cont: Adimant: c. 14 foal. 136, 6,. 10.
Consent or approbation given to unlawful things Perkins on 1 Mat: 5; p. 58,
To^: 3.

The hearing stood for, causes scandals in every one of these particulars; For
it breaks the Holy Order See Par: Rivet: Calvin, Mercer; Comment; in Hos: 5,
10;, which the Lord hath set and settled in his house; makes way unto
down-right halting between Christ and Antichrist; draws many aside from their
former careful walking. And sooke as whe^ a man sets up and baits a trap, we
say now woe to rats and mice; woe to Foxes, Wolves and the baggage vermin; So
when this scandalous snare was first laid, men might have said, woe, woe, woe,
considering how many would be ensnared, catched, destroyed, and killed thereby.
Again, what is it, but a will-worship, a pernicious and most hurtful advice; a
ready way to persuade weak ones Daven; Quaest* 7; p: 40., to think that the
false Church is not so bad, but that they may go back unto it. Hence are many
righteous hearts made sad: Idolaters countenanced and made believe, that such
as come to their worship, doe like their way well enough^ in their hearts, but
for some by respects differ a little from them.

For the practice it self, it is that which Paul never planted Chrisost: de in
comp: not. Dei Ho^: 3. nor Apollo watered, nor God increased: Of it I cannot
say as one said in Sophocles Soph. Anti.: It is no Child of two days or years
birth, but hath been, no man knows how long since. For if we look beyond the
Treat: there will be found no footsteps of it, either in the Exa^ple of former
churches, or among the Orders, rules, and commandments of our Saviour Iesus
Christ and his Apostles, or in any learned mans writing; either ancient or
modern; So that I may say of it, as one Leo Epist: 97; c. 3; said, How are
th^se new devises brought in, that our forefathers never knew*

To be short, our Profession for it lies under contempt and reproach; witness,
Mr. Pagets, Arrow ag: Bro^; p. 59. passage in his book against us, where he
scoffingly writes, that the Treat. first book, being his Justification of
separation, sick of Iehorams incurable desease, the guts of it fall one day by
day, yea he openly plucks out some of the bowels thereof with his own hands.

Again, what watch can the Saints keep each over other, when some are in the
true Church, other at the same time in the Sinagogues of Antichrist. Finally,
seeing we have not one Example for it in all the Scriptures, we may well say,
it is a bad Example; and he that allows of it, allows that which the Lord never
allowed. For the rest in his writing, seeing it concerns not the point in hand;
I will not therefore meddle with it. But for the present will here conclude;
desiring the Lord to show mercy to such as have offended in this hearing of
false Ministers; and with the right hand of his power to raise them out of this
pit; and to keep the feet of his saints from falling into this or the like
snare.

FINIS.
^ ^
